
Electronic Speed Controls for Radio Controlled Models
A speed control takes a pulse-width modulated signal from an R/C receiver and converts it to an amount of power delivered to an electric motor. Here is my understanding of the way they work. The crucial part is a power MOSFET transistor (or a bunch of them, connected in parallel so they can deliver a greater current and present less resistance).

Several plans for speed controls appeared in hobby magazines. I am collecting them for my personal use, but since there are many others interested in building them, I decided to put some of the plans on this page. There are obvious copyright issues involved here. The plans are strictly for non-commercial use by individuals. I believe that this is in accordance with the "fair use" doctrine (as if you went to a local library, and made a Xerox copy). I tried to give proper credits and attribution to the authors.

If you have a speed control plan to contribute, or if you have built one and want to share your experiences, please send me e-mail, and we'll discuss the details. Please note that as a rule I will only be including links to sites which offer such information for free downloading (with rare exceptions made where I feel that the link can assist hobbyists in designing or building their own project).

As time allows, I will be adding more details: US parts equivalents, PostScript diagrams based on the TIFF files, etc. Please note that even though I'm doing my best to be accurate, I am not an electronics genius, nor a polyglot; I can make mistakes while interpreting the materials I have.
Caveats
Most home-grown ESC plans are by design simple. This also means that they will be, as a rule, less reliable and more temperamental than commercial units. An ESC is supposed to detect pulses whose width is varying a little bit, and convert those variations to a big voltage swing which controls the FET. All this has to happen in a nasty environment: vibration, interference from the motor, etc. It isn't a trivial job.

If you are not experienced with debugging such electronics, if you don't have access to tools such as a good multimeter and a decent scope, or if your construction skills aren't great, take my advice: go to a hobby shop and buy a simple ESC for $40 or so. If you try to build one, you'll probably just end up wasting money, time, and feeling frustrated - not to mention possibly endangering yourself and others.

Important: as opposed to most commercial ESCs, most of the simple designs collected here do not have certain special safety features such as arming circuits or false pulse detection. It is common for them to turn on spontaneously when the power is applied, when the transmitter is nearby, or when some interference confuses the circuit. The moment you turn on the battery start behaving as if the motor were running - keep the prop away from anything it can damage (and you did dull that razor-sharp plastic prop with sandpaper, didn't you?)
Plans
This page expands chronologically towards the bottom, so the newest acquisitions are the farthest down.

    A miniature low-rate speed control, designed by Keith Walker, from the newsletter published by Electric Model Flyers' of Southwestern Ontario.
        Text of the article (ASCII)
        Schematic diagram, PostScript or Acrobat format
        Parts list
        PCB layout, PostScript or Acrobat format 

    A miniature high-rate speed control, designed by Keith Walker, also from the newsletter published by Electric Model Flyers' of Southwestern Ontario.
        Text of the article (ASCII)
        Schematic diagram, PostScript or Acrobat format
        Parts list
        PCB layout, PostScript or Acrobat format
        Comments and modifications by Alessandro Malanca 

    A "maxi" speed control with brake, contributed by Josef Hoeltzl (from the German ElektroModell; original by Milan Lulic). I've had reports of success with Milan's designs, but please read all the comments about this one since there was apparently an error in how the IC's pins were labeled.
        Fragments of the article (translated by Josef Hoeltzl); see also comments by Marko Kivela
        Parts list
        Circuit diagram, PostScript or Acrobat format
        TIFF scan of the PCB layout and the German text
        TIFF scan of the circuit diagram and parts list
        Corrected PCB and circuit from Paul Hoogendijk (pins 2 and 3 of the opamp correctly labeled) 

    A simple miniature speed control with brake, contributed by Josef Hoeltzl (from the German ElektroModell; original by Milan Lulic). It can handle 10-12 A, or more if T2, T3 and IC2 are on a heatsink (they must be insulated from each other).
        Parts list
        Circuit diagram, PostScript or Acrobat format
        TIFF scan of page 1 - description
        TIFF scan of page 2 - PCB layout, parts list and schematic 

    A miniature speed control with BEC designed to be mounted directly on a Speed400 motor; contributed by Ulrich Dallman (but see reports of problems and possible fixes I received; I haven't built this one myself).
        Parts list and description
        Circuit diagram, PostScript or Acrobat format
        PCB mask, side 1, PostScript or Acrobat format
        PCB mask, side 2, PostScript or Acrobat format
        PCB, side 1 (magnified 4x), PostScript or Acrobat format
        PCB, side 2 (magnified 4x), PostScript or Acrobat format
        PCB, see-through view of both sides, PostScript or Acrobat format 

    A digital speed control with BEC contributed by Anthony Psaila (but please see below under "Links" for a newer version!)
        Description
        Schematics and pulse diagrams in Adobe Acrobat (PDF) format
        Schematics and pulse diagrams in Microsoft PowerPoint 4 format
        PCB layout in AutoTrax format (sorry, I don't have any way of converting it to something more generic)

    Speed control based on the ZN409 servo IC, designed by Gr間ory Freysseline.
        Comments and the original description (in French)
        Schematics (GIF)
        Parts placement (GIF)
        Circuit board (GIF) 

    A redesign of Milan Lulic's controller, by Johan Stenberg 

Here are some comments about the designs, kindly provided by S鴕en Kj鎟 Nielsen.

Off-site links

    Microchip Corp. Application Note 857 describing a brushless motor ESC.
    Imagine that! There is now a Microchip Corp. Application Note 847 describing their version of an ESC. The circuit is fairly standard, but the software and the article are interesting.
    Not really an ESC, but I've had several requests for this: a simple R/C switch which could be easily adapted to motor control by adding a FET circuit at the tail end.
    Anthony Psaila's page with several digital circuits.
    Stefan Vorkoetter's Miniature High-Rate Speed Controller.
    A Swedish R/C FTP site.
    A PIC-based speed control on Cord's R/C Model Electronics page (you'll find a couple of other interesting gadgets there)
    Chuck McManis has a couple of PIC-based ESCs with reverse: one with a power transistor H-bridge and one which uses MOSFETs.
    Mike Norton's design of a digital control with brake, BEC, undervoltage protection (uses a small 8-pin 12C509 PIC, and Mike provides the code too. That's the spirit!)
    A super-simple ESC made out of a servo, by Eric Filomeno
    Analog and microprocessor speed controls by Johann Aichinger [displaced by sports bras 6/2008]
    Microprocessor speed control and other R/C gadgets by Vitaly Puzrin.
    A brushless motor controller. Many people have been looking for one, that's why I'm including it even though complete schematics and the software are apparently only available for a price. To be fair, I believe that Aveox also sells such units.
    Robot (including a speed control) by Mark Case
    Several R/C projects (including microcontroller ESCs) by Kim Mortensen [10/15/2002: I'm told by Allan Wright that he built the "ATtiny12" using PCBs and chips from Kim, and that it works great.]
    Several R/C projects by Barry Blyth
    Graham D. Forkes has a list of his designs on his website, and sells PCBs and preprogrammed PICs for them
    A variant of Mike Norton's ESC by Bruce Abbott
    Model boat ESCs by John Drain
    4QD - commercial and not quite R/C oriented, but lots of good info on motor control (circuits page unfortunately requires membership for full access)
    Speed controls for robots (good info)
    R/C projects including an ESC
    A simple ESC by Norbert Szentner, with optoisolated input
    An ESC for controlling two motors by Alessandro Malanca 

Personally I'm leaning towards digital designs using microcontrollers. They are likely to be more reliable and usually even simpler than the analog ones because a lot can be done in software. Here are some remarks about microcontroller chips in general, and about speed controls in particular. A nice design appeared in the Feb. 97 issue of Elektor Electronics; my copy has the author's name cut off, but it seems that the design is by Andreas Voggeneder (see links listed above). Andreas gave me his kind permission to put my own copy of his article online - here it is (but without the code). [added in August 2006] Thanks to Victor de Lang we finally have a PDF copy of the complete article from the Dutch Elektor.
[added in May 2004] Gustav Kuhn kindly sent me his 16F84A program for Voggender's ESC. Download (at your own risk) the assembly source or a compiled version. You may also want to look at the 16F84A header file used by that code and at some notes from Gustav.
[added in October 2009] Jason Markham sent me an updated version of Voggender's microprocessor control. Here's a zip archive of all the files. Thanks!

I recently decided to roll my own, and started writing up some of my experiences with trying to beat it into submission. But if you are looking for a working unit, check out Mike Norton's or Andreas Voggender's ESCs which are pretty close to what I was planning to achieve. I guess I'll never finish mine now! ;-(

Back to Behr's R/C page 
