I had been thinking of getting into R/C modelling for a long time, but
it somehow felt like another expensive and time-consuming hobby which
would be forgotten in a month, so I resisted the temptation. But
recently the thoughts about it kept cropping up, primarily because of
some things we were doing with the kids.

We went to a local hobby shop, and asked about nearby R/C club. As it
happened, there was going to be a big demonstration of models during
that Labor Day weekend. Moreover, the store had a nice transmitter
outfit at a very good price! Moreover, I just got a small raise, and
my wife was also intrigued by the newly found toys.

I had read on the Net that it's a good idea to start with a sailplane,
since it's a relatively small investment and is fairly easy to fly. The
only glider in the store was a SIG Riser 100 kit for about $30, so it
ended up in the car's trunk alonside the radio.

We spent the next two days at the modelers' show. It was just as
exciting as the "real" airshow we went to some time earlier, despite
some real show-stoppers at the latter -- a truck powered by three jet
engines, and the B-2 bomber. The kids couldn't wait to get home and
start building our glider.

It turned into a long odyssey, since I was home only on weekends and
couldn't spend _all_ the time making the model. Under normal
circumstances it would probably take a week or 10 days of intensive
gluing, sanding and covering to finish the model. Even though it was a
bit more than we bargained for, I'm still happy that we didn't buy an
ARF kit; we all learned quite a bit by having to do almost everything
from scratch. I want to pass these experiences on to other beginners.

 * * *

First, you need a good workbench. Since a complex model can take weeks
to complete, and not every home has a workshop which is not used for
anything else, that workbench should be easy to remove and prop against
the garage wall or somewhere else.

I worked on a trestle table I made a while ago. The top is a hollow-core
door, which is recommended by most modellers as a bench surface: cheap,
does not bend, relatively lightweight. The door can be placed anywhere:
on a pair of horse saw brackets, or a trestle base made from 2-by-4s
(like mine was), or on some smaller old table. If the surface won't be
used for anything else, and doesn't have to be pretty, get the door from
a lumber surplus yard -- you'll save a lot by buying one that is chipped
or scratched a bit.

Most of the time parts of the model need to be pinned down to the plans
before gluing. The door itself is too hard for that, so it is important
to put some softer material over it. If it isn't soft enough, you'll
hurt your fingers trying to stick pins in it. If it's too soft, the pins
won't hold the wood reliably, and you'll end up with a warped model and
weak glue joints. Many people recommend fiberboard or chipboard which
can be found at any hardware store. A more expensive board sold under
the brand name "Homosote" is also good. Others use ceiling tiles, or a
sheet of cork. The only important things about this element are: it has
to be flat, it should be large enough to hold the largest pin-down
structure you'll be making, and it has to grip the pins well.

 * * *

I started out with only basic tools:

- an X-acto pen knife and a lot of sharp blades
- a utility knife with a sharp blade
- some sewing pins
- a long (3 ft. or more) metal straightedge for cutting longer pieces
- a good, precise ruler
- a pair of home-made sanding blocks, one with 100 grit and the other
  with 150 sandpaper

It quickly turned out that ordinary pins were a big pain to use. A trip
to the hobby shop got us a pack of T-shaped modeller's pins. They come
in various sizes, but I am getting by with only the medium ones so far.

I also kept having trouble with longer crosscuts in thick wood, even in
balsa (not to mention spruce or plywood). A small 4 in. razor saw blade
and a holder was the next item on the shopping list. It is essential for
precise cuts which the X-acto knife cannot handle.

On several occasions I could use small but relatively strong clamps,
such as those sold in office supply stores to hold large reams of paper
together, but I managed without them while making this particular model.
Remember to use ones that aren't _too_ strong, and to put electrician's
tape around the tips, since balsa is really soft and easily gets
squashed under moderate pressure.

I also had to use a small carpenter's square a few times. I'm fortunate
to have a well-equipped workshop for wood projects, so I had drill bits,
screwdrivers, a good small finishing sander and a precise variable speed
drill. For the occasional rough sanding of a wingtip, or drilling a few
holes in the fuselage, "big" tools can be used, if set to their lowest
speed and operated _very_ carefully. But it's a better idea to spend
another $70 or so for a good mini-tool kit such as Dremel. I'll most
likely buy one before making the next model.

For finishing I found the 150 sandpaper to be sufficient, especially if
applied gently, without much pressure. Since my model will be covered
with foil, its shin doesn't have to be smooth as silk -- simply "very
smooth" will do, I hope.

 * * *

Glues come in a bewildering variety. I decided to stick to [sic!] three
basic types: thin cyanoacrylate (CA), Testor's wood model cement, and
5-minute epoxy.

Cyanoacrylate, known as "Crazy Glue", is amazing. However, it's also
quite expensive, especially in the form sold by hobby shops or mail
order modellers' supply outfits. A 2 oz. bottle of it will run you $6
or more. There are several types: thin (which penetrates tight-fitting
joints and sets very fast -- in a couple of seconds!), thick -- which
sets more slowly and has a gel-like consistency, and the thickest one,
used primarily for gluing joints with gaps in them.

Because I'm cheap, I decided to risk an alternative which worked out
pretty well. A local K-Mart or Farm & Fleet will have a wide selection
of glues. Among them you can certainly find CA glues which work with
wood. Note that ordinary "Crazy Glue" won't; the magic word to look for
on the bottle is cyanoacrylate _ester_. I picked one (QuickTite) which
was about $2 for a 0.17 oz. bottle, and it works just fine. This may not
be the right thing to do when you are building a competition aircraft or
a meticulous scale model for an exhibition, but it's OK for "ordinary"
planes.

CA which covers the skin dries into a tough shell, with potential bad
health effects. Also, many people are sensitive or even allergic to its
fumes. As with all chemicals, make sure to work in a well-ventillated
space, and avoid skin contact with the glues.

I use Testor's wood cement to glue large non-critical surfaces such as
top wing sheeting. The reason is that it's very cheap, doesn't set too
fast (so the pieces can be positioned precisely without great hurry),
and the joints in question won't be bearing much of a load. I try to use
it relatively sparingly, because it's much heavier than CA, and I
strengthen the joint with a few drops of CA in strategic places along
the edges.

For strength and filling imperfect joints, epoxy is a must. It is also
messy. You want to prepare everything in advance, get someone's spare
pair of hands to stand by, and mix it _very_ thoroughly before actually
applying it. Use a clean piece of wood to apply it -- the stick you used
for mixing may be mostly covered with one of the two ingredients, so
you'll get a weak joint if you spread that around. The 5-minute epoxy
works best for me. It gives enough time to apply the glue and position
the parts precisely, but sets before your fingers become numb from
holding the pieces together.

 * * *

When I first pinned down thin spar strips and the wing's leading and
trailing surfaces down, and happily dropped CA on all joints, I ended up
with a great mess. The paper plans stuck to the wood in all those
places! This taught me the hard way to use one more layer: wax paper, or
transparent backing from plastic covering such as Monokote (you aren't
likely to have any while making your very first model, though...), or
finally plastic foil used for wrapping food. Several people have had bad
experiences with the latter, which apparently can be dissolved by
certain CA glues. But my CA and Glad Wrap foil worked just fine for me.
One more original idea suggested by an Internet contributor was to get a
can of "tent protection spray", used to make tents waterproof, and spray
it onto the plans; reportedly nothing will stick to them after that!
Make sure not to put pins too close to the joints; otherwise the glue
will seep onto the plans through the holes made by the pins.

On the other hand, I found that the epoxy I had did dissolve Glad Wrap,
and made the bottom of the joint look like gooey mass of plastic. You
should probably use aluminum foil under such a joint, and peel it off
right after the glued parts can be lifted safely.

 * * *

It really pays to spend quite a while perusing the plans without even
touching the parts. I know, you are anxious to start, but patience is
one of the greatest virtues in modelling. Make sure you have some idea
of how the parts fit together, which ones have to be firmly attached to
each other and which ones will be hinged, etc.

You might then want to look at all the parts, trying to fit them to the
plans. Which balsa sheet is 1/32 in. thick and which one is 3/64? Which
1/4x3/8 piece is spruce and which one is balsa? Which piece of plywood
will be needed for scraps and shouldn't be thrown out even after its main
piece has been used? (as a rule, you shouldn't throw anything out until
the model is finished -- even then, you might need some scrap pieces for
inevitable repairs!)

A large model like my 2 m. sailplane is likely to come with 1:1 scale
plans, and those can be hard to manage while working over them --
especially if you start working on several parts in parallel (for
example, assembling the fuselage while the epoxy which joins the wings
is hardening will let you save a lot of time!) See if the plans can be
cut into smaller, easier to handle logical pieces. Also, make sure that
the plans are flat. They usually come folded several times, and will
buckle even on a flat surface, making it hard to pin the wood totally
flat. Get an old but clean rag, spray some water on it, and then iron
the whole thing until the paper is flat.

 * * *

It sounds like a truism, but it is very important to be precise when
cutting wood. Some minor errors won't matter; but others tend to
accumulate, and even small inaccuracies can result in an unacceptable
dihedral wing angle, or a warped tail fin.

In the SIG Riser kit the wings are composed of four pieces, with three
epoxy joints which must be at a specific angle. Careless construction,
in my experience, is hard or even impossible to correct by sanding later
on. I wasn't precise enough in positioning the end ribs at the specified
angle, and ended up with an imperfect joint. I hope I'll get away with
it, because the gaps weren't too big, but I could have saved myself
hours of delicate and tedious sanding had I done it right to start with.

 * * *

The kit has a few parts which have to be bent out of shape and then
glued, such as top leading edge sheeting. When a piece like that is
long, it is impossible to achieve a good contact just by holding it
down with your hands, and even many pins might not be able to take the
stress of bending a half-inch wide strip so it touches the curved ribs. 
As a result, I got several bad joints which had to be re-glued. But thin
CA glue, or wood cement, doesn't adhere well to wood covered with cured
cyanoacrylate...

In a few places I had to use epoxy to get it right. The combined
Net-wisdom later told me that I should have used a gap-filling thick
CA, or sprinkled a bit of baking soda in the gaps and then dropped CA
on it. Baking soda apparently reacts with CA in such a way that it
quickly dries to a consistency of a stone, or at least concrete! It is
very hard to sand, but in some cases it can save the day. But of course
it is best to dry-fit the parts, and make sure that they will adhere
without a problem before applying even the first drop of glue.

 * * *

Be prepared to improvise a bit. For example, my radio came with a tiny
receiver which would easily fit in a much smaller fuselage; but the
servos it came with were standard size, and with the servo arms provided
with them they would not fit in the glider side-by-side. The salesman at
the hobby shop didn't have any small wheels in stock, but very kindly
agreed to take off a pair from other servos and sell them to me.

The servos and standard trays still wouldn't fit easily, so I had to
make a custom mounting bracket. This took some very careful fitting,
cutting, and quite a bit of patience. If I had to do it again, I'd
probably get a pair of mini servos instead.

The nose cone had to be shaped out of a rectangular balsa block, and I
didn't have a good carving knife handy. It turns out that a few cuts
with a razor blade and then some careful strokes with 60 grit paper on
a sanding block quickly reduced the piece to a shape which could be
easily finished with a fine sandpaper.

The pushrods in the SIG kit do not use clevises to attach to the servo
arms; they are supposed to be bent into a Z-shape and inserted in the
arms. But the wire from which they are made was too thick to fit in the
holes; I had to very carefully enlarge them until the wire went through,
but at the same time didn't have much play.

My radio has the servo reversing function, so I didn't have to worry
about it; but pay attention to how the motions of the arm will affect
the control surfaces! You don't want to end up with a plane which goes
down when you _pull_ on the elevator stick...

Make sure the servos and pushrods are low enough to give you clearance
for things that tend to be installed last. In my case it was a close
call: the dowels used to attach the wing with rubber bands go across the
width of the fuselage, and are marked on the plans; but by the time I
got around to fitting them, my servo mount was firmly in place... The
dowel pins barely cleared the pushrod sleeves, even after I drilled the
holes for them a tad higher than indicated on the plan. I later learned
the hard way that it was a bad idea after all: a hard landing ripped a
dowel off, along with a piece of plywood.

Follow the plan closely when it comes to servo location. They contribute
the most to where the center of gravity will be, and you cannot alter
this by much other than by moving the battery, the other heavy item, or
adding a balast weight, which in an ideal world should be avoided. My
CG turned out to be within milimeters from where the plans show it should
be, but it could have been otherwise: I remember with horror that I was
playing with the mount's position quite a bit, moving it back and forth
to see what strikes my fancy the most. Luckily, they ended up more or
less where the designer intended. Even so, I needed a couple of thick
bolts wrapped in rubber foam stuck in the nose to make the balance just
right.

 * * *

Time to cover the model. It is a complex process, but it was in general
easier than I expected (I was worried about it quite a lot). Still, I
made a lot of mistakes. First, I underestimated the amount of covering
needed. It should have been obvious that a 6-foot roll won't suffice to
cover the fuselage _and_ a 72x6in wing (on both sides!) Get at least two
rolls for an average size plane. Second, learning to apply Monokote-type
foil takes a bit of practice and quite a lot of wasted material.

I bought a TopFlite tacking iron, with temperature adjustment knob
labeled with cryptic "Hi", "Mid" and "Low" settings. The TopFlite
covering, however, recommends a specific temperature setting... go
figure. I had best luck with the knob just past the middle position.

There is no way to explain how to tack the material down so it won't
curl, warp or break later. You have to have _the touch_, and that comes
after a bit of practice. Start slowly: cut the covering roughly to size,
think about the pressure points, and bend it around the edges. I start
with the trailing end of the wing, and just slide the iron lightly
along the edge. It will lightly stick to the wood, so you can stretch it
a little and tack it with a long steady stroke to the leading edge.
Don't worry about small creases and warps: those can be ironed out. But
if the thing doesn't "look right", pull the covering off, straighten it
out and try again.

After tacking on the edges you need to cut the foil to size. Just slide
an X-Acto #2 blade along the wing (or fuselage) so about 1/8 - 1/4in is
sticking out beyond the line along which you tacked it in. Finish the
job by gluing that free strip to the wood. Keep thinking about the
forces that the heat-shrinking and air lift will exert on the foil. For
example, if your wing is covered with two pieces of foil, and you don't
iron them down to a wing rib spar strip and to each other, you will end
up with a big hole when you heat-shrink it. All seams have to be quite
strong to prevent this from happening.

Covering such as Monokote doesn't stick to CA-covered wood. Moreover, my
iron lost some of its Teflon when I was sliding it over such tough
spots. Avoid them like a plague when applying the plastic foil.

Seams are comparatively easy to make; if you have a wood surface under
the seam, the bottom layer will stick to it, and the top layer will
stick to the bottom layer easily. A few runs of the iron along the edge,
and you will barely see the joint. Let the plastic overlap by 1/4 of an
inch or less and you'll be OK.

The initial covering is nothing compared with the inevitable repairs you
will have to make. But by that time you should get the hang of it.
Remember that there are two steps where you can correct things: one is
when you heat the plastic with the iron, push out bubbles of air, smooth
the wrinkles, etc. The second, more effective but also more delicate, is
when you use the heat gun (an ordinary hair-dryer usually won't do) to
make the covering stretch and shrink. Be patient, and move the heat gun
back and forth in steady strokes. With some types of foil even a
heavy-duty 1500W heat gun which can make hardwood smoke will take a
minute or more to make the plastic pliable, and then to shrink it. Blow
the hot air at an angle when you see wrinkles.

 * * *

The first thing that will happen is that you will crash. That's why I
chose a glider -- it's slow, and a crash won't dig a foot-deep hole in
the ground, as it might with a powered craft. I went to a city park
which had a 20 degree slope, with nothing around but grass within 500
feet. The wind was 10-15 mph. I threw the sailplane against the wind a
few times to check the trim, then I threw it a bit high -- it flew a few
dozen meters and hit the ground badly. I just wasn't ready. Be humble.
accept the fact that the laws of physics are working against you. You'll
learn to overcome them in due course.


 * * *

There is an enormous amount of knowledge and experience available on the
Net (you have access to it if you are reading this!) But many advanced
modellers will frown and have little patience if you ask questions which
show that you haven't spent any time trying to think them through, or
researched them through "conventional means". Public libraries sometimes
have one or two good books on making models; they can save you the
embarrasment of sending a really trivial question to millions of Internet
users. Magazines are another good source from which you can learn the
fundamentals of R/C flying, model building, and -- yes -- some of the
jargon the R/C people like to use. To mention just two, Model Aircraft
News and R/C Modeller were very helpful to me. They also have many ads
for instructional materials (books, videos) not sold through regular
chanels.

But the most valuable resource is your local club and its members. They
can answer questions, show you their tricks first-hand, teach you to fly
your first model, let you participate in their events. You may be too
shy to ask for help, fearing that you intrude; but in most cases they
are doing it all for fun, and the fun includes showing off their hobby
to others. Imagine yourself five years from now, after you've gone
through 3 radios and 10 models: what will _you_ say to an outsider who
is eager to learn?

When you are really serious about modelling, you'll have to join AMA
(the principal nationwide modellers association), or else you won't be
allowed to participate in any organized activities. The membership is
affordable, and provides additional insurance coverage and other perks
which are well worth the $50 or so per year.

[12/28/95]  (to be continued...)


