Copyright © 2003-2005, Peter Seibel
20. The Special Operators
In a way, the most impressive aspect of the condition system covered in the previous chapter is that if it wasn't already part of the language, it could be written entirely as a user-level library. This is possible because Common Lisp's special operators--while none touches directly on signaling or handling conditions--provide enough access to the underlying machinery of the language to be able to do things such as control the unwinding of the stack.

In previous chapters I've discussed the most frequently used special operators, but it's worth being familiar with the others for two reasons. First, some of the infrequently used special operators are used infrequently simply because whatever need they address doesn't arise that often. It's good to be familiar with these special operators so when one of them is called for, you'll at least know it exists. Second, because the 25 special operators--along with the basic rule for evaluating function calls and the built-in data types--provide the foundation for the rest of the language, a passing familiarity with them will help you understand how the language works.

In this chapter, I'll discuss all the special operators, some briefly and some at length, so you can see how they fit together. I'll point out which ones you can expect to use directly in your own code, which ones serve as the basis for other constructs that you use all the time, and which ones you'll rarely use directly but which can be handy in macro-generated code.

Controlling Evaluation
The first category of special operators contains the three operators that provide basic control over the evaluation of forms. They're QUOTE, IF, and PROGN, and I've discussed them all already. However, it's worth noting how each of these special operators provides one fundamental kind of control over the evaluation of one or more forms. QUOTE prevents evaluation altogether and allows you to get at s-expressions as data. IF provides the fundamental boolean choice operation from which all other conditional execution constructs can be built.1 And PROGN provides the ability to sequence a number of forms.

Manipulating the Lexical Environment
The largest class of special operators contains the operators that manipulate and access the lexical environment. LET and LET*, which I've already discussed, are examples of special operators that manipulate the lexical environment since they can introduce new lexical bindings for variables. Any construct, such as a DO or DOTIMES, that binds lexical variables will have to expand into a LET or LET*.2 The SETQ special operator is one that accesses the lexical environment since it can be used to set variables whose bindings were created by LET and LET*.

Variables, however, aren't the only thing that can be named within a lexical scope. While most functions are defined globally with DEFUN, it's also possible to create local functions with the special operators FLET and LABELS, local macros with MACROLET, and a special kind of macro, called a symbol macro, with SYMBOL-MACROLET.

Much like LET allows you to introduce a lexical variable whose scope is the body of the LET, FLET and LABELS let you define a function that can be referred to only within the scope of the FLET or LABELS form. These special operators are handy when you need a local function that's a bit too complex to define inline as a LAMBDA expression or that you need to use more than once. Both have the same basic form, which looks like this:

(flet (function-definition*)
  body-form*)
and like this:

(labels (function-definition*)
  body-form*)
where each function-definition has the following form:

(name (parameter*) form*)
The difference between FLET and LABELS is that the names of the functions defined with FLET can be used only in the body of the FLET, while the names introduced by LABELS can be used immediately, including in the bodies of the functions defined by the LABELS. Thus, LABELS can define recursive functions, while FLET can't. It might seem limiting that FLET can't be used to define recursive functions, but Common Lisp provides both FLET and LABELS because sometimes it's useful to be able to write local functions that can call another function of the same name, either a globally defined function or a local function from an enclosing scope.

Within the body of a FLET or LABELS, you can use the names of the functions defined just like any other function, including with the FUNCTION special operator. Since you can use FUNCTION to get the function object representing a function defined with FLET or LABELS, and since a FLET or LABELS can be in the scope of other binding forms such as LETs, these functions can be closures.

Because the local functions can refer to variables from the enclosing scope, they can often be written to take fewer parameters than the equivalent helper functions. This is particularly handy when you need to pass a function that takes a single argument as a functional parameter. For example, in the following function, which you'll see again in Chapter 25, the FLETed function, count-version, takes a single argument, as required by walk-directory, but can also use the variable versions, introduced by the enclosing LET:

(defun count-versions (dir)
  (let ((versions (mapcar #'(lambda (x) (cons x 0)) '(2 3 4))))
    (flet ((count-version (file)
             (incf (cdr (assoc (major-version (read-id3 file)) versions)))))
      (walk-directory dir #'count-version :test #'mp3-p))
    versions))
This function could also be written using an anonymous function in the place of the FLETed count-version, but giving the function a meaningful name makes it a bit easier to read.

And when a helper function needs to recurse, an anonymous function just won't do.3 When you don't want to define a recursive helper function as a global function, you can use LABELS. For example, the following function, collect-leaves, uses the recursive helper function walk to walk a tree and gather all the atoms in the tree into a list, which collect-leaves then returns (after reversing it):

(defun collect-leaves (tree)
  (let ((leaves ()))
    (labels ((walk (tree)
               (cond
                 ((null tree))
                 ((atom tree) (push tree leaves))
                 (t (walk (car tree))
                    (walk (cdr tree))))))
      (walk tree))
    (nreverse leaves)))
Notice again how, within the walk function, you can refer to the variable, leaves, introduced by the enclosing LET.

FLET and LABELS are also useful operations to use in macro expansions--a macro can expand into code that contains a FLET or LABELS to create functions that can be used within the body of the macro. This technique can be used either to introduce functions that the user of the macro will call or simply as a way of organizing the code generated by the macro. This, for instance, is how a function such as CALL-NEXT-METHOD, which can be used only within a method definition, might be defined.

A near relative to FLET and LABELS is the special operator MACROLET, which you can use to define local macros. Local macros work just like global macros defined with DEFMACRO except without cluttering the global namespace. When a MACROLET form is evaluated, the body forms are evaluated with the local macro definitions in effect and possibly shadowing global function and macro definitions or local definitions from enclosing forms. Like FLET and LABELS, MACROLET can be used directly, but it's also a handy target for macro-generated code--by wrapping some user-supplied code in a MACROLET, a macro can provide constructs that can be used only within that code or can shadow a globally defined macro. You'll see an example of this latter use of MACROLET in Chapter 31.

Finally, one last macro-defining special operator is SYMBOL-MACROLET, which defines a special kind of macro called, appropriately enough, a symbol macro. Symbol macros are like regular macros except they can't take arguments and are referred to with a plain symbol rather than a list form. In other words, after you've defined a symbol macro with a particular name, any use of that symbol in a value position will be expanded and the resulting form evaluated in its place. This is how macros such as WITH-SLOTS and WITH-ACCESSORS are able to define "variables" that access the state of a particular object under the covers. For instance, the following WITH-SLOTS form:

(with-slots (x y z) foo (list x y z)))
might expand into this code that uses SYMBOL-MACROLET:

(let ((#:g149 foo))
  (symbol-macrolet
      ((x (slot-value #:g149 'x))
       (y (slot-value #:g149 'y))
       (z (slot-value #:g149 'z)))
    (list x y z)))
When the expression (list x y z) is evaluated, the symbols x, y, and z will be replaced with their expansions, such as (slot-value #:g149 'x).4

Symbol macros are most often local, defined with SYMBOL-MACROLET, but Common Lisp also provides a macro DEFINE-SYMBOL-MACRO that defines a global symbol macro. A symbol macro defined with SYMBOL-MACROLET shadows other symbol macros of the same name defined with DEFINE-SYMBOL-MACRO or enclosing SYMBOL-MACROLET forms.

Local Flow of Control
The next four special operators I'll discuss also create and use names in the lexical environment but for the purposes of altering the flow of control rather than defining new functions and macros. I've mentioned all four of these special operators in passing because they provide the underlying mechanisms used by other language features. They're BLOCK, RETURN-FROM, TAGBODY, and GO. The first two, BLOCK and RETURN-FROM, are used together to write code that returns immediately from a section of code--I discussed RETURN-FROM in Chapter 5 as a way to return immediately from a function, but it's more general than that. The other two, TAGBODY and GO, provide a quite low-level goto construct that's the basis for all the higher-level looping constructs you've already seen.

The basic skeleton of a BLOCK form is this:

(block name
  form*)
The name is a symbol, and the forms are Lisp forms. The forms are evaluated in order, and the value of the last form is returned as the value of the BLOCK unless a RETURN-FROM is used to return from the block early. A RETURN-FROM form, as you saw in Chapter 5, consists of the name of the block to return from and, optionally, a form that provides a value to return. When a RETURN-FROM is evaluated, it causes the named BLOCK to return immediately. If RETURN-FROM is called with a return value form, the BLOCK will return the resulting value; otherwise, the BLOCK evaluates to NIL.

A BLOCK name can be any symbol, which includes NIL. Many of the standard control construct macros, such as DO, DOTIMES, and DOLIST, generate an expansion consisting of a BLOCK named NIL. This allows you to use the RETURN macro, which is a bit of syntactic sugar for (return-from nil ...), to break out of such loops. Thus, the following loop will print at most ten random numbers, stopping as soon as it gets a number greater than 50:

(dotimes (i 10)
  (let ((answer (random 100)))
    (print answer)
    (if (> answer 50) (return))))
Function-defining macros such as DEFUN, FLET, and LABELS, on the other hand, wrap their bodies in a BLOCK with the same name as the function. That's why you can use RETURN-FROM to return from a function.

TAGBODY and GO have a similar relationship to each other as BLOCK and RETURN-FROM: a TAGBODY form defines a context in which names are defined that can be used by GO. The skeleton of a TAGBODY is as follows:

(tagbody
  tag-or-compound-form*)
where each tag-or-compound-form is either a symbol, called a tag, or a nonempty list form. The list forms are evaluated in order and the tags ignored, except as I'll discuss in a moment. After the last form of the TAGBODY is evaluated, the TAGBODY returns NIL. Anywhere within the lexical scope of the TAGBODY you can use the GO special operator to jump immediately to any of the tags, and evaluation will resume with the form following the tag. For instance, you can write a trivial infinite loop with TAGBODY and GO like this:

(tagbody
 top
   (print 'hello)
   (go top))
Note that while the tag names must appear at the top level of the TAGBODY, not nested within other forms, the GO special operator can appear anywhere within the scope of the TAGBODY. This means you could write a loop that loops a random number of times like this:

(tagbody
 top
   (print 'hello)
   (when (plusp (random 10)) (go top)))
An even sillier example of TAGBODY, which shows you can have multiple tags in a single TAGBODY, looks like this:

(tagbody
 a (print 'a) (if (zerop (random 2)) (go c))
 b (print 'b) (if (zerop (random 2)) (go a))
 c (print 'c) (if (zerop (random 2)) (go b)))
This form will jump around randomly printing as, bs, and cs until eventually the last RANDOM expression returns 1 and the control falls off the end of the TAGBODY.

TAGBODY is rarely used directly since it's almost always easier to write iterative constructs in terms of the existing looping macros. It's handy, however, for translating algorithms written in other languages into Common Lisp, either automatically or manually. An example of an automatic translation tool is the FORTRAN-to-Common Lisp translator, f2cl, that translates FORTRAN source code into Common Lisp in order to make various FORTRAN libraries available to Common Lisp programmers. Since many FORTRAN libraries were written before the structured programming revolution, they're full of gotos. The f2cl compiler can simply translate those gotos to GOs within appropriate TAGBODYs.5

Similarly, TAGBODY and GO can be handy when translating algorithms described in prose or by flowcharts--for instance, in Donald Knuth's classic series The Art of Computer Programming, he describes algorithms using a "recipe" format: step 1, do this; step 2, do that; step 3, go back to step 2; and so on. For example, on page 142 of The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 2: Seminumerical Algorithms, Third Edition (Addison-Wesley, 1998), he describes Algorithm S, which you'll use in Chapter 27, in this form:

Algorithm S (Selection sampling technique). To select n records at random from a set of N, where 0 < n <= N.
S1. [Initialize.] Set t <-- 0, m <-- 0. (During this algorithm, m represents the number of records selected so far, and t is the total number of input records that we have dealt with.)
S2. [Generate U.] Generate a random number U, uniformly distributed between zero and one.
S3. [Test.] If (N - t)U >= n - m, go to step S5.
S4. [Select.] Select the next record for the sample, and increase m and t by 1. If m < n, go to step S2; otherwise the sample is complete and the algorithm terminates.
S5. [Skip.] Skip the next record (do not include it in the sample), increase t by 1, and go back to step S2.
This description can be easily translated into a Common Lisp function, after renaming a few variables, as follows:

(defun algorithm-s (n max) ; max is N in Knuth's algorithm
  (let (seen               ; t in Knuth's algorithm
        selected           ; m in Knuth's algorithm
        u                  ; U in Knuth's algorithm
        (records ()))      ; the list where we save the records selected
    (tagbody
     s1
       (setf seen 0)
       (setf selected 0)
     s2
       (setf u (random 1.0))
     s3
       (when (>= (* (- max seen) u) (- n selected)) (go s5))
     s4
       (push seen records)
       (incf selected)
       (incf seen)
       (if (< selected n)
           (go s2)
           (return-from algorithm-s (nreverse records)))
     s5
       (incf seen)
       (go s2))))
It's not the prettiest code, but it's easy to verify that it's a faithful translation of Knuth's algorithm. But, this code, unlike Knuth's prose description, can be run and tested. Then you can start refactoring, checking after each change that the function still works.6

After pushing the pieces around a bit, you might end up with something like this:

(defun algorithm-s (n max)
  (loop for seen from 0
     when (< (* (- max seen) (random 1.0)) n)
     collect seen and do (decf n)
     until (zerop n)))
While it may not be immediately obvious that this code correctly implements Algorithm S, if you got here via a series of functions that all behave identically to the original literal translation of Knuth's recipe, you'd have good reason to believe it's correct.

Unwinding the Stack
Another aspect of the language that special operators give you control over is the behavior of the call stack. For instance, while you normally use BLOCK and TAGBODY to manage the flow of control within a single function, you can also use them, in conjunction with closures, to force an immediate nonlocal return from a function further down on the stack. That's because BLOCK names and TAGBODY tags can be closed over by any code within the lexical scope of the BLOCK or TAGBODY. For example, consider this function:

(defun foo ()
  (format t "Entering foo~%")
  (block a
    (format t " Entering BLOCK~%")
    (bar #'(lambda () (return-from a)))
    (format t " Leaving BLOCK~%"))
  (format t "Leaving foo~%"))
The anonymous function passed to bar uses RETURN-FROM to return from the BLOCK. But that RETURN-FROM doesn't get evaluated until the anonymous function is invoked with FUNCALL or APPLY. Now suppose bar looks like this:

(defun bar (fn)
  (format t "  Entering bar~%")
  (baz fn)
  (format t "  Leaving bar~%"))
Still, the anonymous function isn't invoked. Now look at baz.

(defun baz (fn)
  (format t "   Entering baz~%")
  (funcall fn)
  (format t "   Leaving baz~%"))
Finally the function is invoked. But what does it mean to RETURN-FROM a block that's several layers up on the call stack? Turns out it works fine--the stack is unwound back to the frame where the BLOCK was established and control returns from the BLOCK. The FORMAT expressions in foo, bar, and baz show this:

CL-USER> (foo)
Entering foo
 Entering BLOCK
  Entering bar
   Entering baz
Leaving foo
NIL
Note that the only "Leaving . . ." message that prints is the one that appears after the BLOCK in foo.

Because the names of blocks are lexically scoped, a RETURN-FROM always returns from the smallest enclosing BLOCK in the lexical environment where the RETURN-FROM form appears even if the RETURN-FROM is executed in a different dynamic context. For instance, bar could also contain a BLOCK named a, like this:

(defun bar (fn)
  (format t "  Entering bar~%")
  (block a (baz fn))
  (format t "  Leaving bar~%"))
This extra BLOCK won't change the behavior of foo at all--the name a is resolved lexically, at compile time, not dynamically, so the intervening block has no effect on the RETURN-FROM. Conversely, the name of a BLOCK can be used only by RETURN-FROMs appearing within the lexical scope of the BLOCK; there's no way for code outside the block to return from the block except by invoking a closure that closes over a RETURN-FROM from the lexical scope of the BLOCK.

TAGBODY and GO work the same way, in this regard, as BLOCK and RETURN-FROM. When you invoke a closure that contains a GO form, if the GO is evaluated, the stack will unwind back to the appropriate TAGBODY and then jump to the specified tag.

BLOCK names and TAGBODY tags, however, differ from lexical variable bindings in one important way. As I discussed in Chapter 6, lexical bindings have indefinite extent, meaning the bindings can stick around even after the binding form has returned. BLOCKs and TAGBODYs, on the other hand, have dynamic extent--you can RETURN-FROM a BLOCK or GO to a TAGBODY tag only while the BLOCK or TAGBODY is on the call stack. In other words, a closure that captures a block name or TAGBODY tag can be passed down the stack to be invoked later, but it can't be returned up the stack. If you invoke a closure that tries to RETURN-FROM a BLOCK, after the BLOCK itself has returned, you'll get an error. Likewise, trying to GO to a TAGBODY that no longer exists will cause an error.7

It's unlikely you'll need to use BLOCK and TAGBODY yourself for this kind of stack unwinding. But you'll likely be using them indirectly whenever you use the condition system, so understanding how they work should help you understand better what exactly, for instance, invoking a restart is doing.8

CATCH and THROW are another pair of special operators that can force the stack to unwind. You'll use these operators even less often than the others mentioned so far--they're holdovers from earlier Lisp dialects that didn't have Common Lisp's condition system. They definitely shouldn't be confused with try/catch and try/except constructs from languages such as Java and Python.

CATCH and THROW are the dynamic counterparts of BLOCK and RETURN-FROM. That is, you wrap CATCH around a body of code and then use THROW to cause the CATCH form to return immediately with a specified value. The difference is that the association between a CATCH and THROW is established dynamically--instead of a lexically scoped name, the label for a CATCH is an object, called a catch tag, and any THROW evaluated within the dynamic extent of the CATCH that throws that object will unwind the stack back to the CATCH form and cause it to return immediately. Thus, you can write a version of the foo, bar, and baz functions from before using CATCH and THROW instead of BLOCK and RETURN-FROM like this:

(defparameter *obj* (cons nil nil)) ; i.e. some arbitrary object

(defun foo ()
  (format t "Entering foo~%")
  (catch *obj*
    (format t " Entering CATCH~%")
    (bar)
    (format t " Leaving CATCH~%"))
  (format t "Leaving foo~%"))

(defun bar ()
  (format t "  Entering bar~%")
  (baz)
  (format t "  Leaving bar~%"))

(defun baz ()
  (format t "   Entering baz~%")
  (throw *obj* nil)
  (format t "   Leaving baz~%"))
Notice how it isn't necessary to pass a closure down the stack--baz can call THROW directly. The result is quite similar to the earlier version.

CL-USER> (foo)
Entering foo
 Entering CATCH
  Entering bar
   Entering baz
Leaving foo
NIL
However, CATCH and THROW are almost too dynamic. In both the CATCH and the THROW, the tag form is evaluated, which means their values are both determined at runtime. Thus, if some code in bar reassigned or rebound *obj*, the THROW in baz wouldn't throw to the same CATCH. This makes CATCH and THROW much harder to reason about than BLOCK and RETURN-FROM. The only advantage, which the version of foo, bar, and baz that use CATCH and THROW demonstrates, is there's no need to pass down a closure in order for low-level code to return from a CATCH--any code that runs within the dynamic extent of a CATCH can cause it to return by throwing the right object.

In older Lisp dialects that didn't have anything like Common Lisp's condition system, CATCH and THROW were used for error handling. However, to keep them manageable, the catch tags were usually just quoted symbols, so you could tell by looking at a CATCH and a THROW whether they would hook up at runtime. In Common Lisp you'll rarely have any call to use CATCH and THROW since the condition system is so much more flexible.

The last special operator related to controlling the stack is another one I've mentioned in passing before--UNWIND-PROTECT. UNWIND-PROTECT lets you control what happens as the stack unwinds--to make sure that certain code always runs regardless of how control leaves the scope of the UNWIND-PROTECT, whether by a normal return, by a restart being invoked, or by any of the ways discussed in this section.9 The basic skeleton of UNWIND-PROTECT looks like this:

(unwind-protect protected-form
  cleanup-form*)
The single protected-form is evaluated, and then, regardless of how it returns, the cleanup-forms are evaluated. If the protected-form returns normally, then whatever it returns is returned from the UNWIND-PROTECT after the cleanup forms run. The cleanup forms are evaluated in the same dynamic environment as the UNWIND-PROTECT, so the same dynamic variable bindings, restarts, and condition handlers will be visible to code in cleanup forms as were visible just before the UNWIND-PROTECT.

You'll occasionally use UNWIND-PROTECT directly. More often you'll use it as the basis for WITH- style macros, similar to WITH-OPEN-FILE, that evaluate any number of body forms in a context where they have access to some resource that needs to be cleaned up after they're done, regardless of whether they return normally or bail via a restart or other nonlocal exit. For example, if you were writing a database library that defined functions open-connection and close-connection, you might write a macro like this:10

(defmacro with-database-connection ((var &rest open-args) &body body)
  `(let ((,var (open-connection ,@open-args)))
    (unwind-protect (progn ,@body)
      (close-connection ,var))))
which lets you write code like this:

(with-database-connection (conn :host "foo" :user "scott" :password "tiger")
  (do-stuff conn)
  (do-more-stuff conn))
and not have to worry about closing the database connection, since the UNWIND-PROTECT will make sure it gets closed no matter what happens in the body of the with-database-connection form.

Multiple Values
Another feature of Common Lisp that I've mentioned in passing--in Chapter 11, when I discussed GETHASH--is the ability for a single form to return multiple values. I'll discuss it in greater detail now. It is, however, slightly misplaced in a chapter on special operators since the ability to return multiple values isn't provided by just one or two special operators but is deeply integrated into the language. The operators you'll most often use when dealing with multiple values are macros and functions, not special operators. But it is the case that the basic ability to get at multiple return values is provided by a special operator, MULTIPLE-VALUE-CALL, upon which the more commonly used MULTIPLE-VALUE-BIND macro is built.

The key thing to understand about multiple values is that returning multiple values is quite different from returning a list--if a form returns multiple values, unless you do something specific to capture the multiple values, all but the primary value will be silently discarded. To see the distinction, consider the function GETHASH, which returns two values: the value found in the hash table and a boolean that's NIL when no value was found. If it returned those two values in a list, every time you called GETHASH you'd have to take apart the list to get at the actual value, regardless of whether you cared about the second return value. Suppose you have a hash table, *h*, that contains numeric values. If GETHASH returned a list, you couldn't write something like this:

(+ (gethash 'a *h*) (gethash 'b *h*))
because + expects its arguments to be numbers, not lists. But because the multiple value mechanism silently discards the secondary return value when it's not wanted, this form works fine.

There are two aspects to using multiple values--returning multiple values and getting at the nonprimary values returned by forms that return multiple values. The starting points for returning multiple values are the functions VALUES and VALUES-LIST. These are regular functions, not special operators, so their arguments are passed in the normal way. VALUES takes a variable number of arguments and returns them as multiple values; VALUES-LIST takes a single list and returns its elements as multiple values. In other words:

(values-list x) === (apply #'values x)
The mechanism by which multiple values are returned is implementation dependent just like the mechanism for passing arguments into functions is. Almost all language constructs that return the value of some subform will "pass through" multiple values, returning all the values returned by the subform. Thus, a function that returns the result of calling VALUES or VALUES-LIST will itself return multiple values--and so will another function whose result comes from calling the first function. And so on.11

But when a form is evaluated in a value position, only the primary value will be used, which is why the previous addition form works the way you'd expect. The special operator MULTIPLE-VALUE-CALL provides the mechanism for getting your hands on the multiple values returned by a form. MULTIPLE-VALUE-CALL is similar to FUNCALL except that while FUNCALL is a regular function and, therefore, can see and pass on only the primary values passed to it, MULTIPLE-VALUE-CALL passes, to the function returned by its first subform, all the values returned by the remaining subforms.

(funcall #'+ (values 1 2) (values 3 4))             ==> 4
(multiple-value-call #'+ (values 1 2) (values 3 4)) ==> 10
However, it's fairly rare that you'll simply want to pass all the values returned by a function onto another function. More likely, you'll want to stash the multiple values in different variables and then do something with them. The MULTIPLE-VALUE-BIND macro, which you saw in Chapter 11, is the most frequently used operator for accepting multiple return values. Its skeleton looks like this:

(multiple-value-bind (variable*) values-form
  body-form*)
The values-form is evaluated, and the multiple values it returns are bound to the variables. Then the body-forms are evaluated with those bindings in effect. Thus:

(multiple-value-bind (x y) (values 1 2)
  (+ x y)) ==> 3
Another macro, MULTIPLE-VALUE-LIST, is even simpler--it takes a single form, evaluates it, and collects the resulting multiple values into a list. In other words, it's the inverse of VALUES-LIST.

CL-USER> (multiple-value-list (values 1 2))
(1 2)
CL-USER> (values-list (multiple-value-list (values 1 2)))
1
2
However, if you find yourself using MULTIPLE-VALUE-LIST a lot, it may be a sign that some function should be returning a list to start with rather than multiple values.

Finally, if you want to assign multiple values returned by a form to existing variables, you can use VALUES as a SETFable place. For example:

CL-USER> (defparameter *x* nil)
*X*
CL-USER> (defparameter *y* nil)
*Y*
CL-USER> (setf (values *x* *y*) (floor (/ 57 34)))
1
23/34
CL-USER> *x*
1
CL-USER> *y*
23/34
EVAL-WHEN
A special operator you'll need to understand in order to write certain kinds of macros is EVAL-WHEN. For some reason, Lisp books often treat EVAL-WHEN as a wizards-only topic. But the only prerequisite to understanding EVAL-WHEN is an understanding of how the two functions LOAD and COMPILE-FILE interact. And understanding EVAL-WHEN will be important as you start writing certain kinds of more sophisticated macros, such as the ones you'll write in Chapters 24 and 31.

I've touched briefly on the relation between LOAD and COMPILE-FILE in previous chapters, but it's worth reviewing again here. The job of LOAD is to load a file and evaluate all the top-level forms it contains. The job of COMPILE-FILE is to compile a source file into a FASL file, which can then be loaded with LOAD such that (load "foo.lisp") and (load "foo.fasl") are essentially equivalent.

Because LOAD evaluates each form before reading the next, the side effects of evaluating forms earlier in the file can affect how forms later in the form are read and evaluated. For instance, evaluating an IN-PACKAGE form changes the value of *PACKAGE*, which will affect the way subsequent forms are read.12 Similarly, a DEFMACRO form early in a file can define a macro that can then be used by code later in the file.13

COMPILE-FILE, on the other hand, normally doesn't evaluate the forms it's compiling; it's when the FASL is loaded that the forms--or their compiled equivalents--will be evaluated. However, COMPILE-FILE must evaluate some forms, such as IN-PACKAGE and DEFMACRO forms, in order to keep the behavior of (load "foo.lisp") and (load "foo.fasl") consistent.

So how do macros such as IN-PACKAGE and DEFMACRO work when processed by COMPILE-FILE? In some pre-Common Lisp versions of Lisp, the file compiler simply knew it should evaluate certain macros in addition to compiling them. Common Lisp avoided the need for such kludges by borrowing the EVAL-WHEN special operator from Maclisp. This operator, as its name suggests, allows you to control when specific bits of code are evaluated. The skeleton of an EVAL-WHEN form looks like this:

(eval-when (situation*)
  body-form*)
There are three possible situations--:compile-toplevel, :load-toplevel, and :execute--and which ones you specify controls when the body-forms will be evaluated. An EVAL-WHEN with multiple situations is equivalent to several EVAL-WHEN forms, one per situation, each with the same body code. To explain the meaning of the three situations, I'll need to explain a bit about how COMPILE-FILE, which is also referred to as the file compiler, goes about compiling a file.

To explain how COMPILE-FILE compiles EVAL-WHEN forms, I need to introduce a distinction between compiling top-level forms and compiling non-top-level forms. A top-level form is, roughly speaking, one that will be compiled into code that will be run when the FASL is loaded. Thus, all forms that appear directly at the top level of a source file are compiled as top-level forms. Similarly, any forms appearing directly in a top-level PROGN are compiled as top-level forms since the PROGN itself doesn't do anything--it just groups together its subforms, which will be run when the FASL is loaded.14 Similarly, forms appearing directly in a MACROLET or SYMBOL-MACROLET are compiled as top-level forms because after the compiler has expanded the local macros or symbol macros, there will be no remnant of the MACROLET or SYMBOL-MACROLET in the compiled code. Finally, the expansion of a top-level macro form will be compiled as a top-level form.

Thus, a DEFUN appearing at the top level of a source file is a top-level form--the code that defines the function and associates it with its name will run when the FASL is loaded--but the forms within the body of the function, which won't run until the function is called, aren't top-level forms. Most forms are compiled the same when compiled as top-level and non-top-level forms, but the semantics of an EVAL-WHEN depend on whether it's being compiled as a top- level form, compiled as a non-top-level form, or simply evaluated, combined with what situations are listed in its situation list.

The situations :compile-toplevel and :load-toplevel control the meaning of an EVAL-WHEN compiled as a top-level form. When :compile-toplevel is present, the file compiler will evaluate the subforms at compile time. When :load-toplevel is present, it will compile the subforms as top-level forms. If neither of these situations is present in a top-level EVAL-WHEN, the compiler ignores it.

When an EVAL-WHEN is compiled as a non-top-level form, it's either compiled like a PROGN, if the :execute situation is specified, or ignored. Similarly, an evaluated EVAL-WHEN--which includes top-level EVAL-WHENs in a source file processed by LOAD and EVAL-WHENs evaluated at compile time because they appear as subforms of a top-level EVAL-WHEN with the :compile-toplevel situation--is treated like a PROGN if :execute is present and ignored otherwise.

Thus, a macro such as IN-PACKAGE can have the necessary effect at both compile time and when loading from source by expanding into an EVAL-WHEN like the following:

(eval-when (:compile-toplevel :load-toplevel :execute)
  (setf *package* (find-package "PACKAGE-NAME")))
*PACKAGE* will be set at compile time because of the :compile-toplevel situation, set when the FASL is loaded because of :load-toplevel, and set when the source is loaded because of the :execute.

There are two ways you're most likely to use EVAL-WHEN. One is if you want to write macros that need to save some information at compile time to be used when generating the expansion of other macro forms in the same file. This typically arises with definitional macros where a definition early in a file can affect the code generated for a definition later in the same file. You'll write this kind of macro in Chapter 24.

The other time you might need EVAL-WHEN is if you want to put the definition of a macro and helper functions it uses in the same file as code that uses the macro. DEFMACRO already includes an EVAL-WHEN in its expansion so the macro definition is immediately available to be used later in the file. But DEFUN normally doesn't make function definitions available at compile time. But if you use a macro in the same file as it's defined in, you need the macro and any functions it uses to be defined. If you wrap the DEFUNs of any helper functions used by the macro in an EVAL-WHEN with :compile-toplevel, the definitions will be available when the macro's expansion function runs. You'll probably want to include :load-toplevel and :execute as well since the macros will also need the function definitions after the file is compiled and loaded or if you load the source instead of compiling.

Other Special Operators
The four remaining special operators, LOCALLY, THE, LOAD-TIME-VALUE, and PROGV, all allow you to get at parts of the underlying language that can't be accessed any other way. LOCALLY and THE are part of Common Lisp's declaration system, which is used to communicate things to the compiler that don't affect the meaning of your code but that may help the compiler generate better code--faster, clearer error messages, and so on.15 I'll discuss declarations briefly in Chapter 32.

The other two, LOAD-TIME-VALUE and PROGV, are infrequently used, and explaining the reason why you might ever want to use them would take longer than explaining what they do. So I'll just tell you what they do so you know they're there. Someday you'll hit on one of those rare times when they're just the thing, and then you'll be ready.

LOAD-TIME-VALUE is used, as its name suggests, to create a value that's determined at load time. When the file compiler compiles code that contains a LOAD-TIME-VALUE form, it arranges to evaluate the first subform once, when the FASL is loaded, and for the code containing the LOAD-TIME-VALUE form to refer to that value. In other words, instead of writing this:

(defvar *loaded-at* (get-universal-time))

(defun when-loaded () *loaded-at*)
you can write the following:

(defun when-loaded () (load-time-value (get-universal-time)))
In code not processed by COMPILE-FILE, LOAD-TIME-VALUE is evaluated once when the code is compiled, which may be when you explicitly compile a function with COMPILE or earlier because of implicit compilation performed by the implementation in the course of evaluating the code. In uncompiled code, LOAD-TIME-VALUE evaluates its form each time it's evaluated.

Finally, PROGV creates new dynamic bindings for variables whose names are determined at runtime. This is mostly useful for implementing embedded interpreters for languages with dynamically scoped variables. The basic skeleton is as follows:

(progv symbols-list values-list
  body-form*)
where symbols-list is a form that evaluates to a list of symbols and values-list is a form that evaluates to a list of values. Each symbol is dynamically bound to the corresponding value, and then the body-forms are evaluated. The difference between PROGV and LET is that because symbols-list is evaluated at runtime, the names of the variables to bind can be determined dynamically. As I say, this isn't something you need to do often.


