
Discover  Docs  Blog  Community Sign inSign up   
Docs
Open webOS Architecture
Developer Guide
Developer Reference
webOS Application APIs
webOS Foundations
webOS Service APIs
Accelerometer
Activity Manager
Alarms
Application Manager
Connection Manager
db8
Download Manager
Key Manager
System Properties
System Services
webOS Data Types
webOS Configuration Files
Building Open webOS
Porting Open webOS
Share on linkedin Share on facebook Share on twitter Share on email More Sharing Services
webOS Service APIs
This section documents APIs for interacting with webOS services.

Developer options for accessing services

You can open a shell on a device through putty and use luna-send to test out accessing services at the command-line.
JavaScript apps and services can use the Foundations library's PalmCall.
Tools for testing services

luna-send - A good way to learn service API syntax and experiment; after, you can write the code to do what you already did at the command line.
ls-monitor - Lets you see traffic going over the webOS service bus, similar to a network sniffer that lets you observe HTTP traffic.
Service	Description
Accelerometer	Captures orientation events and accelerometer data.
Activity Manager	Schedules and priotizes device activities - apps, services, tasks, network flows, etc.
Alarms	Sets a timer to activate on the device either after a specified interval or at a specified date and time.
Application Manager	Invokes default handlers or apps for common resource types and basic device operations.
Connection Manager	Gets connection status and subscribes to notifications of connection status changes.
db8	Interfaces to an embedded JSON database.
Download Manager	Downloads or uploads a file.
Key Manager	Provides key management and cryptographic functionality.
System Properties	Retrieves named system properties.
System Services	Enables apps to access various system settings
485 Potrero Ave. Sunnyvale, CA 94085 
+1 408-617-7000 Main Phone
Careers
Sponsored by 
© 2012 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. 
All screen images simulated. Site is best viewed in Chrome, Firefox, Safari, IE9 and above.  Privacy Policy  Terms of Use
