
Health
Women's HealthSearch
Women's Health
Topics A-ZSexual HealthHealthy LivingSharePrint
Discuss in our forum
What Every Woman Needs to Know About Heart Disease
From Tracee Cornforth, former About.com Guide
Updated March 29, 2010
About.com Health's Disease and Condition content is reviewed by the Medical Review Board
See More About:estrogenssmokinghealthy eatingobesitymenopause
Ads
Do you have a AAA?
www.goremedical.com
Download a patient guide on abdominal aortic aneurysm repair.
Heart Valve Surgery Book
www.Heart-Valve-Surgery.com
For Patients And Caregivers Learn What To Expect. Avoid Stress.
Fun Brain Test Games
www.lumosity.com
Test and Improve your Brain With Scientifically Designed Exercises
More Women's Health Ads
What Causes Heart Disease
Reduce Heart Disease Risk
Symptoms of Heart Disease
Facts About Heart Disease
Heart Disease and Diet
Did you know that 1 of 3 women die of heart disease? Sadly, only about one-third of women know that heart disease is the #1 killer of women in the United States; it's also the number one killer of men. Not only can heart disease lead to death, but it can also lead to disability and a greatly decreased quality of life.
The Cold Hard Facts About Heart Disease

Heart disease kills more people each year than all other causes of death combined including all forms of cancer, including breast cancer, colon cancer, and prostate cancer. 

Heart disease is the single most preventable cause of death. Lifestyle factors play a key role in heart disease. Things like smoking, failing to get regular exercise, and eating a non-healthy diet can significantly increase your risk of hear disease. 

Many factors play a role in who is at risk of dying of heart disease including race, geography, and what state you live in.
Among the many changes menopause brings women is that it is a time when a woman's risk of heart disease starts to increase. For several decades it was believed that post-menopausal estrogen replacement or estrogen with progestin would help protect women against heart disease. However, this is no longer the case since the Women's Health Initiative study found that estrogen with progestin actually increases heart disease risk and causes more risks than benefits.

Unfortunately, many women do not take their risk of heart disease personally. Often women think, as many of us do, that "It won't happen to me." Many times women don't realize the connections between such risk factors as hypertension or high cholesterol levels, and how these affect their personal risk of developing heart disease.

Most of us know the so-called "normal" symptoms of heat attack-- pain down the left arm, chest pain or pressure, etc.. But did you know that women often experience heart attack symptoms in a different way than men? 
See: A Woman's Heart - Symptoms of Heart Attack In Women

So what are you doing to prevent yourself from becoming a victim heart disease or a heart attack?
What You Can Do To Help Reduce Your Risk Of Heart Disease?

Schedule an appointment to talk to your doctor about your personal heart disease risk.
See: Questions to ask your doctor

If you smoke, quit. Not only does smoking increase your risk of heart disease, it also presents a whole host of other health issues that are uniquely women.
See: Smoking - The Women's Health Perspective

Most Americans are not getting enough physical activity. Just one hour of aerobic activity 3 to 5 times a week as been shown to significantly lower your risk of heart disease, and several forms of cancer.
Obesity and it's related complications are a major cause of heart disease. Did you know that over fifty percent of Americans are considered overweight with a BMI of over 25, and one-quarter of American adults are obese with a BMI of over 30?
See: Eating For A Healthy Heart
Heart disease takes many years to develop, often starting during the teen years. It's never too early or too late to start taking these preventative measures against heart disease.

New posts to the Menopause forums:
Hot flushes and calf pain
Hoping it's perimenopause...
Red, hot ears and face.
New posts to the Women's Health forums:
Very abnormal period
vaginal dryness
Fertility issue
New posts to the Premenstrual Syndrome forums:
what do you think?
Fibroids and cysts
What is Up With The Allay Relief Patch?
Related Articles
The Truth About Heart Disease In Women - What Every Woman Needs to Know
Heart Disease and Women
The Age Factor: Cholesterol and Menopause - Low Cholesterol
Heart Disease, Cardiovascular Disease
Heart disease and women
Ads
Diabetic Diet & Meals
www.diabetesinfocenter.org
Free Diabetic Recipes > Breakfast, Lunch - Snack - Dinner - Dessert.
Jesus Loves You
GodLife.com/Jesus2020
Here is a Prayer For You This Prayer Can Change Your Life.
苏州看妇科 到苏州圣爱医院
www.szsayy.com
华东地区实力品牌妇科医院,专业治疗 各种妇科疾病, 为您解决女性烦恼！
Advertisement

Ads
已婚男士交友专区
www.zhiji.com
知己交友 专为成熟人士提供 约会 婚恋 亲密关系
weight loss diet
www.diabetescare.net
Learn to live with diabetes. Get resources and information now.
Ladies Swallow Goldfish
GoldfishSwallowing.com
Hot ladies and guys gulping their prey live on camera!
Top Related Searches High Cholesterol Levels Heart Disease Risk Single Most Preventable Cause Heart Attack Symptoms Estrogen Replacement Cancer Colon
Explore Women's Health
Must Reads
Going to the Gynecologist
Menstruation Basics
Pregnancy Signs and Symptoms
Birth Control Myths
Top Causes of Heavy Menstruation
Most Popular
Urinary Tract Infections
Causes of Vaginal Bleeding
Bleeding Between Periods
what_does_it_mean_if_im
Causes of Heavy Bleeding
See More About:
estrogens
smoking
healthy eating
obesity
menopause
By Category
Birth Control
Menstruation
Heart Health
Menopause
Breast Health and Diseases
Sexual Health
Female Reproductive Health
Fitness and Health
Pregnancy
Teen Health
Mental Health
Cancer
Women's Health Glossary
Diseases and Conditions
Health and Beauty
 Women's Health
About.comHealthWomen's HealthHeart HealthThe Truth About Heart Disease In Women - What Every Woman Needs to Know About Heart Disease
Also from About.com:Calorie Count - Nutrition DatabaseAdvertise on About.comOur StoryNews & EventsSiteMapAll TopicsReprintsHelpWrite for AboutCareers at AboutUser AgreementEthics PolicyPatent Info.Privacy PolicyYour Ad Choices
©2013 About.com. All rights reserved.

We comply with the HONcode standard
for trustworthy health information: verify here.
