

    HOME
    HEALTH TOPICS A-Z
        		
    HEALTHY LIVING
        	
    CHECK YOUR SYMPTOMS
        	
    DRUGS & TREATMENTS
    FIND A DOCTOR
    HEALTH VIDEOS
     

    Featured on Yahoo! Health:
    Foods that Fight Colds
    Probiotics and Digestive Health
    Fire Up Your Metabolism
    Surprising Sugar Alternatives
    Compare Medicare Plans

Healthline
How People Actually Get Happier
By Linda Wasmer Andrews
一月 03, 2013
Send
Share
Print
Tweet
Health Experts Main
All in Your Mind
by Linda Wasmer Andrews
Recent Posts

    Buddy Up to Stick with Resolutions
    Babies Learn Better When Sitting Up
    Loneliness Now, Dementia Later?

More Articles »

Psychologists have identified a number of life strategies that help people get happier. These strategies have proved to be effective in controlled studies. But how do people really use them in everyday life?

That’s the question posed by a crack team of happiness investigators led by Acacia Parks, PhD, an assistant professor of psychology at Hiram College in Ohio. In a new study in the journal Emotion, Dr. Parks and her colleagues found some interesting answers.

Foods that Calm Your Mind
14 Happiness Boosters that Work

First, the researchers identified 14 happiness strategies with solid evidence to back them up. Then they asked 114 online volunteers to take a survey about which strategies they used to make themselves happier. Here’s how the strategies stacked up, from most popular to least:

    Doing acts of kindness for others
    Pursuing personally meaningful goals
    Expressing gratitude
    Being optimistic
    Doing physical exercise or sports
    Nurturing social relationships
    Savoring life’s joys
    Acting like a happy person
    Doing activities “in the moment”
    Forgiving others
    Practicing religion or spirituality
    Using strategies to manage stress
    Avoiding overthinking
    Practicing meditation

More than three-quarters of the volunteers said they made themselves happier by doing acts of kindness for others, the most popular strategy. But even meditation, the least popular strategy, was used by one in five of these online happiness seekers.

Facts About Mono
Getting Happy in the Real World

On average, volunteers said they were currently using eight of the strategies. In contrast, experimental studies focus on one thing at a time. That’s intentional, because it allows researchers to tease out the specific effects of a particular action. But it’s also artificial, which is why it’s just as important to look at what people actually do when left to their own devices in the real world.

Here are some insights into how people make the most of happiness strategies in everyday life:

    Practice frequently. Volunteers invested serious time in the pursuit of happiness. They reported doing their most meaningful activity at least several times a week, on average. And they typically spent at least 40 minutes on it each time.
    Continue long-term. The uptick in happiness that came from starting a new strategy sometimes wore off over time. But even when that happened, it usually didn’t occur for several months.
    Mix it up. The same research team also studied users of a phone app featuring eight happiness activities. People who practiced a greater variety of activities got a bigger mood boost.

Learn More about Foot, Leg, and Ankle Swelling

——————————

Get the information you need to improve your health and wellness on Healthline.com.

Faces of OA of the Knee. Learn how patients have dealt with osteoarthritis of the knee.

 

Knee Pain Assessment. Find out more about your knee pain by using our simple assessment tool.

 

What to Expect from Chemotherapy Treatment. Oncologist Dr. Steve Eisenberg answers some of the most commonly asked questions about chemotherapy treatment and its side effects.

 

10 Best Asthma Blogs of 2012. From preventing attacks to helping teachers learn about asthma medication, these asthmatics and their loved ones offer a wealth of information.

 

Gluten Allergies Food List. Learn which foods to eat and which to avoid..

 

More Resources: Compare Medicare Plans...BodyMaps for iPad...Depressed After a Nap?...Knee Pain Assessment
View All 2 Comments »
LEAVE YOUR COMMENT

Follow Yahoo! Health on Twitter and become a fan on Facebook
Follow @YahooHealth on Twitter
Related Videos
 
Stress and Illness, Children and Peer Pressure, & Weight Gain and Denial - HER Week In Health
By Empowher
More Videos »
Related Health News
Health Highlights: Aug.24, 2011
八月 25, 2011 - HealthDay
More on YAHOO! Health

    Health Topics A-Z
    Healthy Living
    Symptoms Checker

    Drugs & Treatments
    Find a Doctor
    Health Experts

    Tip of the Day
    Health News
    Videos

Also on YAHOO!

    Answers
    Local
    Mail

    Messenger
    News
    Shine

Yahoo! Health is for informational purposes only and is not a substitute for professional medical or health advice, examination, diagnosis, or treatment.
Powered by Healthline Copyright © 2013 Yahoo! Inc. All rights reserved. | Yahoo! Lifestyles Network | Terms of Service | Copyright/IP Policy | Help
We collect personal information on this site. To learn more about how we use your personal information, see our Privacy Policy | About Our Ads

