











. 



. .









Log in
 Register
 Subscribe
 
Digital & mobile
Events
Topics A-Z
Newsletters
Jobs








.




 


.
 ..World politicsUnited States
 Britain
 Europe
 China
 Asia
 Americas
 Middle East & Africa
 
Business & financeAll Business & finance
 Which MBA?
 Business Books Quarterly
 
EconomicsAll Economics
 Economics by invitation
 Economics A-Z
 Markets & data
 
Science & technologyAll Science & technology
 Technology Quarterly
 
CultureAll Culture
 More Intelligent Life
 Style guide
 The Economist Quiz
 Book reviews
 
BlogsLatest blog posts
 Feast and famine
 Analects
 Free exchange
 Americas view
 Game theory
 Babbage
 Graphic detail
 Banyan
 Gulliver
 Baobab
 Johnson
 Blighty
 Lexington's notebook
 Buttonwood's notebook
 Newsbook
 Cassandra
 Pomegranate
 Charlemagne
 Prospero
 Democracy in America
 Schumpeter
 Eastern approaches
 
DebateEconomist debates
 What the world thinks
 Economics by invitation
 Letters to the editor
 
The World in 2013
 MultimediaWorld
 Business & economics
 Science & technology
 Culture
 Events
 The Economist in audio
 
Print editionCurrent issue
 Previous issues
 Special reports
 Politics this week
 Business this week
 Leaders
 KAL's cartoon
 Obituary
 
... 




















Leap seconds

Their time has come

Are leap seconds about to be abolished?

 Jan 14th 2012 | from the print edition 





.. 

THE phrase “clockwork universe” is more than a pithy tribute to the exactitude of physics. For thousands of years, the movement of the heavens (or rather, as was eventually realised, the movement of the Earth within the heavens) served as exactly that—a clock. It still does. Even the hyper-accurate atomic clocks now used to record the passage of Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), the globe's official standard, regularly defer to the addition of so-called leap seconds. These are introduced every so often by the time lords of the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service. Their purpose is to match the relentless stream of regular 86,400-second days that pour out of atomic clocks with the slight irregularities that the Earth experiences in its rotation around its axis.
 
But possibly no longer. Next week, the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is meeting in Geneva, and one of the items on its agenda is the abolition of the leap second. If the assembled delegates vote in favour, then the next leap second (which will be added one second before midnight on June 30th, causing clocks set to UTC to display 23:59:59 for two seconds instead of one) will be one of the last—and the answer to the question “what time is it?” will have ceased to have anything to do with the revolutions of the heavens.
 
Worrying about a few stray seconds may remind some readers of medieval debates about the precise number of angels that could be crammed onto the head of a pin. But, say the abolitionists, time—even small amounts of it—does matter. America's Global Positioning System satellites, for instance, do not add leap seconds to their internal clocks, and are therefore out of step with UTC. Receivers on the ground can correct for that discrepancy. But the satellite-navigation systems being launched by China, Europe and Russia use still other definitions of time, so exceptions to UTC are proliferating. That has led to worries that mismatched time signals could cause navigation problems, since even small errors in a time signal would mean positions being off by tens of metres.

In this sectionMagic bullets
 Spot check
 »Their time has come
 A new debugger
 The Richard Casement internship
 Apology
 
Reprints

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Related topics
China
 Europe
 United Kingdom
 International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
 
Electronic communication is another area where leap seconds are unwelcome. Days in which it is a second before midnight on two occasions can confuse software that relies on accurately timed messages to function. Workarounds exist, but they cause problems of their own. After some of its computers failed to cope with a leap second in 2005, Google, a search-engine firm, has begun running its computer clocks slowly for a short period before one is due, making the change gradual instead of instantaneous. But, notes Peter Whibberley of the National Physical Laboratory (NPL), Britain's official measurements lab, that means that while the correction is being applied Google's watches are out of sync with everybody else's. And because leap seconds are needed irregularly their insertion cannot be automated, which means that fallible humans must insert them by hand.
 
Opponents of abolition say such problems are overstated. Engineers are used to dealing with the vagaries of leap seconds, according to Markus Kuhn, a computer scientist at the University of Cambridge. He thinks that a lot of those who worry about leap seconds do not actually have much experience of how things like satnav systems really work. And the switch would not be without problems of its own. Astronomers would be particularly cross: they rely on time having some connection with the movement of the heavens, so that their computers can point their telescopes at the correct patch of sky at a given time every night. A few years down the line, says Dr Kuhn, people may find that automated commercial satellite dishes, which also rely on an astronomical definition of time to spot their quarry, start to fail. Fixing them could mean wading through millions of lines of ancient computer code.
 





In the longer term, more dramatic effects would appear. Over the decades, centuries and millennia, atomic time would begin to diverge blatantly from solar time because the Earth's rotation, besides being irregularly variable, is also gradually slowing down (see chart). In about 2,000 years the two measurements would be roughly four hours out of kilter. Eventually, atomic clocks would say it was midday in the middle of the night.
 
That may seem like a distant worry, but measurements of time can endure for a long time. It has been customary to divide a day into 24 hours for at least 4,000 years, for instance. The final objection is emotional. “Do we really”, ask the leap seconds' defenders, “want to abandon the sun-based reckoning that humans have relied on for their entire recorded history?”
 
Sadly for the traditionalists, the odds seem stacked against them. An internal ITU poll, conducted last year, found that, of the 16 countries (out of 192) that bothered to reply, 13 were in favour of abolishing leap seconds, whereas only three—thought to be Britain, Canada and China—wanted to keep them. The clockwork universe, then, has had a good run. But its mainspring may be about to break.

 from the print edition | Science and technology 
. 



Recommend
70

 

Submit to reddit
 inShare.
 


.. 


View all comments (38).
. 


Related items





TOPIC: China »
Japan's election: Shinzo Abe's sumo-sized win
 Focus: Patent applications
 Japan goes to the polls: The voters hold their noses...
 


TOPIC: Europe »
Demography: The convergence of the twain
 Reforming macroeconomics: Claudio Borio on the financial cycle
 Italian politics and Europe: The Silvio and Mario show
 .



TOPIC: United Kingdom »
Gun control: The gun control that works: no guns
 Non-bank finance: Filling the bank-shaped hole
 Measuring diversity: The London effect
 


TOPIC: International Telecommunication Union (ITU) »
Internet regulation: A digital cold war?
 Online privacy: Difference Engine: Nobbling the internet
 Internet governance: System error
 .. 

Want more? Subscribe to The Economist and get the week's most relevant news and analysis...
 






















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































. . 


Comment (38)
 Print
 E-mail
 Reprints & permissions
 
.. 



Advertisement
 . 



. 



. 




Most popular
Recommended
Commented


Recommended
1Daily chartBirth right
2Cardboard bicycles: Re-cycling
3International: The lottery of life
4Tablet computers: Difference Engine: Smaller still is smarter
5The fiscal cliff deal: America’s European moment

Commented
1Gun controlThe right to commit treason
2Charlemagne: All hope not lost
3The fiscal cliff deal: Short-term relief, and little else
4Daily chart: Birth right
5The Senkaku or Diaoyu Islands: Narrative of an empty space
 




. 



Advertisement
 . 



Latest blog posts - All times are GMT
 

The first Gulf war: Vietnam, Saddam and other ghostsLexington's notebook - Jan 3rd, 23:26 .

Transparency and secrecy: Score one for the thicketDemocracy in America - Jan 3rd, 21:43 .

Google and antitrust: Unbiased viewSchumpeter - Jan 3rd, 21:18 .

The business of polo: Cloney poniesGame theory - Jan 3rd, 21:07 .

This week in print: Haiti's recovery, Argentine politics and poloAmericas view - Jan 3rd, 21:05 .

Business lending: Credit crunch 6.0Free exchange - Jan 3rd, 17:51 .

Review: Rosetta StoneJohnson - Jan 3rd, 16:47 . 
More from our blogs » 
. 



Products & events

Stay informed today and every day

Get e-mail newsletters
Subscribe to The Economist's free e-mail newsletters and alerts.

Follow The Economist on Twitter
Subscribe to The Economist's latest article postings on Twitter

Follow The Economist on Facebook
See a selection of The Economist's articles, events, topical videos and debates on Facebook.
 . 



Advertisement
 . . . 















. 

Classified ads



 
. 



. 



. 



. 



. 



. .

About The Economist
Media directory
Advertising info
Staff books
Career opportunities
Subscribe
Contact us
Site index
[+] Site Feedback 
.
Copyright © The Economist Newspaper Limited 2013. All rights reserved.
Accessibility
Privacy policy
Cookies info
Terms of use
Help
. 




















.
