Skip to content | Accessibility
The GNU Operating System
Sign up for the Free Software Supporter
A monthly email newsletter about GNU and Free Software
Enter your email address (e.g. richard@example.com)
   
  
Philosophy Licenses Education Downloads Documentation Help GNU Join the FSF!
Releases | Supported Platforms | Obtaining Emacs | Documentation | Support | Further information

GNU Emacs

New to Emacs?
Take the Emacs tour
GNU Emacs is an extensible, customizable text editor—and more. At its core is an interpreter for Emacs Lisp, a dialect of the Lisp programming language with extensions to support text editing. The features of GNU Emacs include:

Content-sensitive editing modes, including syntax coloring, for a variety of file types including plain text, source code, and HTML.
Complete built-in documentation, including a tutorial for new users.
Full Unicode support for nearly all human languages and their scripts.
Highly customizable, using Emacs Lisp code or a graphical interface.
A large number of extensions that add other functionality, including a project planner, mail and news reader, debugger interface, calendar, and more. Many of these extensions are distributed with GNU Emacs; others are available separately.
Releases

The current stable release is 24.2. To obtain it, visit the obtaining section.

Emacs 24 has a wide variety of new features, including:

A packaging system and interface (M-x list-packages) for downloading and installing extensions. A default package archive is hosted by GNU and maintained by the Emacs developers.
Support for displaying and editing bidirectional text, including right-to-left scripts such as Arabic and Hebrew.
Support for lexical scoping in Emacs Lisp.
Improvements to the Custom Themes system (M-x customize-themes).
Unified and improved completion system in many modes and packages.
Built-in support for GnuTLS, GTK+ 3, ImageMagick, SELinux, and Libxml2.
For more information, read the News file.

Release History
August 27, 2012 - Emacs 24.2 released
June 10, 2012 - Emacs 24.1 released
January 29, 2012 - Emacs 23.4 released
March 10, 2011 - Emacs 23.3 released
May 8, 2010 - Emacs 23.2 released
July 29, 2009 - Emacs 23.1 released
September 5, 2008 - Emacs 22.3 released
March 26, 2008 - Emacs 22.2 released
June 2, 2007 - Emacs 22.1 released
Feb 6, 2005 - Emacs 21.4 released
March 24, 2003 - Emacs 21.3 released
March 18, 2002 - Emacs 21.2 released
October 28, 2001 - Emacs 21.1 released
Supported Platforms

Emacs 24 runs on these operating systems regardless of the machine type:

GNU
GNU/Linux
GNU/kFreeBSD
FreeBSD
NetBSD
OpenBSD
Solaris
Mac OS X
AIX
MS Windows
MS DOS
GNU Emacs contains code for supporting several other operating systems and machine types; however, in many cases we don't know whether they still work. The definitive reference for this is the MACHINES file, which is also distributed with GNU Emacs; this file also lists the special requirements for compiling GNU Emacs on these systems.

Obtaining/Downloading GNU Emacs

GNU Emacs can be downloaded from http://ftp.gnu.org/pub/gnu/emacs/, or from a GNU mirror.

GNU Emacs development is hosted on savannah.gnu.org. See the Emacs project page on Savannah, where the latest development sources are publicly available from our Bazaar repository.

Documentation

Two Emacs manuals, the GNU Emacs manual and An Introduction to Programming in Emacs Lisp, can be purchased in printed form from the FSF store. These manuals, along with the Emacs Lisp Reference Manual and several other manuals documenting major modes and other optional features, can also be read online. They are also distributed with Emacs in Info format; type C-h i in Emacs to view them.

GNU Emacs manual		Read Online	Purchase
An Introduction to Programming in Emacs Lisp		Read Online	Purchase
Emacs Lisp Reference Manual		Read Online	(out of print)
Other Emacs manuals		Read Online	
The Emacs distribution includes the full source code for the manuals, as well as the Emacs Reference Card in several languages.

The Emacs FAQ can be read online as HTML or plain text. The Emacs on Windows FAQ is available here. The source code for these FAQs are also part of the Emacs distribution.

Support

To ask for help with GNU Emacs, use the mailing list help-gnu-emacs@gnu.org or the newsgroup gnu.emacs.help. The mailing list and newsgroup are linked: messages posted on one appear on the other as well.
To report bugs, or to contribute fixes and improvements, use the built-in Emacs bug reporter (M-x report-emacs-bug) or send email to bug-gnu-emacs@gnu.org. You can browse our bug database at debbugs.gnu.org. For more information on contributing, see the CONTRIBUTE file (also distributed with Emacs).
For all other queries, consult the list of Emacs-related mailing lists on savannah.gnu.org and the complete list of GNU mailing lists on lists.gnu.org. See Get Help with GNU Software for help with GNU software in general.
Further Information

The Emacs FAQ (html, plain text) contains information about Emacs history, common problems, and how to obtain optional extensions.

Emacs 24 includes a built-in package manager, which you can use to download additional Emacs extensions. Type M-x list-packages to view a list of available packages. The default package archive is hosted by the GNU project; more archives can be added by customizing the variable package-archives.

The Emacs Wiki is a community website about using and programming Emacs, including information about optional extensions; complete manuals or documentation fragments; comments on the different Emacs versions, flavors, and ports; and references to other Emacs related information on the Web.

The Savannah Emacs page has additional information about Emacs, including access to the Emacs development sources.

For those curious about Emacs history: Emacs was originally implementated in 1976 on the MIT AI Lab's Incompatible Timesharing System (ITS), as a collection of TECO macros. The name “Emacs” was originally chosen as an abbreviation of “Editor MACroS”. This version of Emacs, GNU Emacs, was originally written in 1984. For more information, see the 1981 paper by Richard Stallman, describing the design of the original Emacs and the lessons to be learned from it, and a transcript of his 2002 speech at the International Lisp Conference, My Lisp Experiences and the Development of GNU Emacs.

GNU Emacs Fun

April Fool Mail - emacs rewrite

More humor related to GNU Emacs and others

Here is the cover of the original Emacs Manual for ITS; the cover of the original Emacs Manual for Twenex; and (the only cartoon RMS has ever drawn) the Self-Documenting Extensible Editor.
GNU home page FSF home page GNU Art GNU Fun GNU's Who? Free Software Directory Site map
The Free Software Foundation is the principal organizational sponsor of the GNU Operating System. Our mission is to preserve, protect and promote the freedom to use, study, copy, modify, and redistribute computer software, and to defend the rights of Free Software users. Support GNU and the FSF by buying manuals and gear, joining the FSF as an associate member or by making a donation, either directly to the FSF or via Flattr.

back to top

Please send FSF & GNU inquiries & questions to gnu@gnu.org. There are also other ways to contact the FSF.

Please send comments on these web pages to bug-emacs@gnu.org.

We thank Greg Harvey for writing this page.

Copyright © 1998, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009 Free Software Foundation, Inc.,

51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110, USA
Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire article is permitted in any medium, provided this notice is preserved.

Updated: $Date: 2013/01/24 17:03:39 $
Please see the Translations README for information on coordinating and submitting translations of this article.

Translations of this page

English [en]
