



Click to Chat

Company
News & Events
Login










Veracode
Products








Services













Blog
Resources










Partners









Static Analysis
 







Security Index

 

Security Testing Tools
Source Code Analysis
 
Software Code Security
 
Code Review Tools
 
Penetration Testing
 
Static Analysis Tool
 
Application Testing Tool
 
Software Testing Tools
 
Source Code Security Analyzer
 
Static Code Analysis
 
Vulnerability Scanning Tools
 
Web Application Security Testing
 
Binary Code Analysis
 
Vulnerability Assessment Software
 


Vulnerabilities

 

Secure Development Lifecycle

 

Data Loss Prevention

 

Attacks 












Live Chat by LivePerson 














inShare.0















State of Software Security Report
Download 

Static Analysis Tool

What is Static Analysis?

Static analysis is the analysis of computer software that is performed without actually executing, or running, that software. Static analysis tools look at applications in a non-runtime environment. This method of testing has distinct advantages in that it can evaluate both web and non-web applications and through advanced modeling, can detect flaws in the software’s inputs and outputs that cannot be seen through dynamic web scanning alone. In the past this technique required source code which is not only unpractical as source code often is unavailable but also insufficient. The Veracode static analysis tool scans binary code (also called “compiled” or “byte” code) instead of source code, Veracode's static analysis tool enables enterprises to test software more effectively and comprehensively, providing greater security for the organization.

Static analysis tool delivers software security

Enterprise security is highly focused on the application layer today, and for good reason. Because the network perimeter has been successfully secured to a great degree, most malicious attacks are now directed at applications. To address this threat, enterprises must test applications for flaws or threats before procuring or implementing them. Static analysis is one of the leading testing techniques. A static analysis tool reviews program code, searching for application coding flaws, back doors, or other malicious code that could give hackers access to critical company data or customer information. But most static analysis tools only can scan source code, which is problematic. Many applications integrate code from third-party libraries, offshore software, and commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) applications - and source code for these applications are often unavailable for scanning. 

Static Analysis Tools for C/C++, Java and C#

Veracode offers the industry’s most comprehensive automated static analysis tools, making your application development faster and more reliable than ever before. Veracode scans binary code - compiled or “byte” code - allowing enterprises to scan 100 percent of an application, even when source is not available for practical or proprietary considerations. Veracode is built on the software-as-a-service model, allowing organizations to access and scale security testing without the need for capital expense or investment. There is no vulnerability assessment software or hardware to purchase and no security personnel to train. Developers or software procurement personnel submit code through an online platform, and results are returned within 24 hours. Veracode's automated format greatly reduces the amount of effort and resources needed to perform static analysis, while greatly increasing the accuracy of test results. 

Veracode delivers innovative static analysis tools

Veracode was founded by experts from leading application security companies to help organizations achieve code security more effectively and cost-efficiently. Veracode is revolutionizing the code analysis space by delivering static analysis tools as a service, instead of an on-premises product. Veracode's solution enables companies to forgo capital expenditure in vulnerability assessment software and hardware. Because Veracode is automated and easy to use, companies no longer need to hire security assessment experts or consultants. Because Veracode's static analysis tool scans compiled applications instead of source code - Veracode can test 100 percent of an application, offering comprehensive coverage and greater application security. 

Click here to view the demo of Veracode's Static Analysis tool 

See More Veracode Security Solutions
 Code Review
 Penetration Testing
 Static Code Analysis
 Vulnerability Scanning
 Web Application Testing
 Software Testing Tools
 Application Testing Tool
 Source Code Security Analyzer
 

Written by: Fergal Glynn 

 
 



© 2006-2012 Veracode, Inc. | 65 Network Drive, Burlington, MA 01803 (339) 674-2500 | Careers




inShare.0









 
ProductsProducts Overview
Veracode Static
Veracode Dynamic
Veracode eLearning
Veracode Analytics
Veracode Policy Manager
Veracode APIs
Veracode Mobile

ServicesServices Overview
VAST Program
App Sec Consulting
Manual Penetration Testing
PCI Compliance
Independent Software Audit
Services for Security Team
Services for Executive Team
Services for Developers
Services for Government
Security

 
Careers
Blog
Privacy Policy
ResourcesVeracode Research
Analyst Reports
Case Studies
Webcasts
Demos
Whitepapers
Datasheets
Podcasts
Videos
Try Now
Security

PartnersPartners Overview
Why Partner with Veracode?
Partner Benefits
Partner Offerings
Become a Partner
Find a Partner

 SQL Injection
 Web Security
 Cross-Site Scripting
 Mobile Security
 Vulnerability Assessment
 Source Code Analysis
 Software Code Security
 Code Review Tools
 Penetration Testing
 Static Analysis Tool
 Application Testing Tool
 Software Testing Tools
 Source Code Security Analyzer
Static Code Analysis
 Vulnerability Scanning Tools
 Web Application Security Testing
 Insecure Cryptographic Storage
 Serious About Security
 Malicious Code
 Internet Security
 Dynamic Analysis
 Veracode State of Software Security Report - Vendor Software Security Analysis
 Veracode Acquires Marvin Mobile Security
 Veteran Technology Reporter Paul Roberts Becomes A Regular Contributor To The Veracode Blog
 Veracode Secures Software Supply Chain with the Vendor Application Security Testing (VAST) Program
 Veracode Infographic Reveals the New Face of 21st Century Warfare
 Veracode Releases New eBook “Why Should I Care? Mobile Security for the Rest of Us” 
Veracode Announces Winners of Its Inaugural Secure Development Award
 Veracode’s Chris Eng to Discuss Mobile Device Application Security at HITRUST 2012 Conference
 Veracode Claims ‘Information Security Product of the Year’ for its Veracode Platform
 Veracode Releases Study of Software Related Cybersecurity Risks in Public Companies
 Veracode Secures $30M in Additional Funding and Expands Executive Team
 Good Technology Chooses Veracode to Improve Mobile App Security
 
