传统桌面 GUI

X Window System

the X Window System (commonly X11 or X) is a windowing system that implements the X display protocol and provides windowing on bitmap displays. It provides the standard toolkit and protocol with which to build graphical user interfaces (GUIs) on most Unix-like operating systems and OpenVMS, and has been ported to many other contemporary general purpose operating systems. There are two implemention: XFree86 and X.Org

GTK/GNOME

GTK+ is a highly usable, feature rich toolkit for creating graphical user interfaces which boasts cross platform compatibility and an easy to use API. The GNOME project provides two things: The GNOME desktop environment, an intuitive and attractive desktop for users, and the GNOME development platform, an extensive framework for building applications that integrate into the rest of the desktop.

QT/KDE

Qt is a cross-platform application development framework, widely used for the development of GUI programs (in which case it is known as a widget toolkit), and also used for developing non-GUI programs such as console tools and servers.KDE or the K Desktop Environment, is a network transparent contemporary desktop environment for UNIX workstations. KDE seeks to fulfill the need for an easy to use desktop for UNIX workstations, similar to desktop environments found on Macintosh and Microsoft Windows operating systems.

Mac OS X

Mac OS X is a uniquely powerful development platform, supporting multiple development technologies including UNIX, Java, the proprietary Cocoa and Carbon runtime environments, and a host of open source, web, scripting, database, and development technologies. Built around the integrated stack of graphics and media technologies including Core Image, Core Video, Core Audio and QuickTime, Mac OS X provides a solid foundation for developers to create great applications. Mac OS X Tiger also offers powerful user technologies like Spotlight and Dashboard that can be exploited by developers in their applications.

Java UI Programming

Swing: the Java GUI components
Events: responding to user input
Graphics: basic 2D painting
Manipulation: advanced user input, dragging, etc.
Animation
开源的嵌入式 GUI

DirectFB

DirectFB is a thin library that provides developers with hardware graphics acceleration, input device handling and abstraction, integrated windowing system with support for translucent windows and multiple display layers on top of the Linux Framebuffer Device. It is a complete hardware abstraction layer with software fallbacks for every graphics operation that is not supported by the underlying hardware.

FBUI

FBUI is a tiny GUI that resides inside the Linux kernel. The key concepts of FBUI are that firstly it is small; secondly that it is spartan, which is good; thirdly that it is just another driver; and fourthly that drivers belong in the kernel, not in userspace.

moblin UI framework

This project includes all portions of the UI and the framework. The underlying framework is GTK-based and uses the Hildon application framework*. As a result, MID applications will share many of the UI and style characteristics of Nokia N-level handheld devices. However, the MID UI, navigation, and user experience will be different in many ways.

Hilton

Hilton is an application framework composed of a lightweight desktop, a set of widgets optimized for handheld devices, a set of theming tools and other complementary lib and apps.

GPE Palmtop Environment

This project aims to provide a Free Software GUI environment for palmtop/handheld computers running the GNU/Linux operating system. GPE uses the X Window System, and the GTK+ widget toolkit

GtkFB

GtkFB beginning with version 2.0, GTK+ will support rendering directly to the Linux framebuffer instead of using the X Window System. This is good for embedded systems and devices with limited resources, because it eliminates the overhead of an X server, while still taking advantage of the power of GTK+ and the large base of existing programs.

Matchbox

Matchbox is a small foot-print window manager and associated applications, designed specifically for resource-constrained X11-enabled devices such as handheld computers, PDA's, set-top boxes, and consumer devices where display size, storage, CPU bandwidth, and input mechanisms are limited. Matchbox includes a window manager, a panel, a desktop, a shared utility library, and a number of small panel applications.

Microwindows

Microwindows is an Open Source project aimed at bringing the features of modern graphical windowing environments to smaller devices and platforms. Microwindows applications can be built and tested on the Linux desktop, as well as cross-compiled for the target device.

OpenGUI

OpenGUI is a fast, 32-bit, high-Level C/C++ graphics & windowing library/GUI built upon a fast, low-level x86 asm graphics kernel. It is under LGPL license. OpenGUI provides 2D drawing primitives and an event-driven windowing API for easy application development.

PicoGUI

PicoGUI is a small, portable client/server GUI designed to work on many types of hardware including handheld computers. Like the X Window System, it has a flexible client-server architecture. Unlike X, however, fonts, bitmaps, widgets, and anything else the application needs are built directly into the server. This sacrifices a small decrease in flexibility for an increase in speed and a large decrease in size.

Tiny-X

Tiny-X is a small footprint X Window server implementation for embedded systems. It was developed by Keith Packard of the XFree86 Core Team, sponsored by SuSE. The goal was to create something that would work well in a small memory footprint and, importantly, be robust in near out-of-memory situations. Typical X servers based on Tiny-X can fit in less than 1MB on x86 CPUs. The project has since forked into several projects, including KDrive, SmallX, and http://www.x-oz.com/tinyx.html.

Xynth Windowing System

Xynth Windowing system is a free software project to build a portable, embedded client-server windowing system. The Xynth Windowing System, released under the GPL, offers a lightweight GUI-capable windowing system usable in Linux-based embedded systems and devices, such as handhelds and set-top boxes.

非开源的嵌入式 GUI

Trolltech : Qtopia and Qt/Embedded

Qtopia is a mobile device window environment and application suite for PDAs, palmtop computers, Internet appliances, and similar devices. Qtopia is based on Qt/Embedded (described above), and includes PIM applications, Internet clients, entertainment and games, utilities, and more. Qtopia/PDA is available in commercial or open source licenses, while Qtopia Phone Edition is commercial-only.

Tilcon : Interface Development Suite

Tilcon Interface Development Suit is a multi-platform user interface development solution that delivers robust, highly interactive user interfaces for real-times, embedded and mission critical applications.

Feynman Software : MiniGUI

MiniGUI is a dual-licensed (GPL or commercially licensable) project to create a small windowing system support library for embedded systems and devices, which offers the equivalent window management functions of Win32 APIs.

Fluffy Spider : FancyPants

This commercial graphics framework from Australian ISV Fluffy Spider is a set of lightweight special effects software for user interfaces (UIs). FancyPants supports skinning, overlays, and fancy effects, and targets media-centric consumer and mobile devices, such as POS (point-of-sales/service) systems, set-top boxes, and mobile phones.

Swell Software : LinuxPEG

LinuxPEG is an embedded GUI library and development toolkit designed specifically for embedded systems. The LinuxPEG library is designed to run on any Linux distribution and its development tools run in the X11 development environment. LinuxPEG, which is available under license, is small footprint, completely ROMable, includes full C++ source code, and is royalty fee.

基于脚本语言的 GUI

python-etk

其它

Simple DirectMedia Layer (STL)

STL is an open source cross-platform multimedia development API/library designed to provide fast access to the graphics framebuffer and audio device. SDL is currently being applied to a number of Embedded Linux implementations such as Microwindows.

Allegro

Allegro is a game programming library for C/C++ developers distributed freely, supporting the following platforms: DOS, Unix (Linux, FreeBSD, Irix, Solaris, Darwin), Windows, QNX, BeOS and MacOS X. It provides many functions for graphics, sounds, player input (keyboard, mouse and joystick) and timers. It also provides fixed and floating point mathematical functions, 3d functions, file management functions, compressed datafile and a GUI.
