IEEE.orgIEEE Xplore Digital LibraryIEEE Standards AssociationSpectrum OnlineMore IEEE Sites

About IEEE Smart Grid
Conferences
Publications
Standards
Newsletter
Resources
Search   Share this |        
Join the Smart Grid Technical Community

IEEE Smart Grid  Resources  IEEE Press Releases  IEEE launches smart grid Web portal, content-rich gateway providing intelligence, education and news on global smart grid
Smart Grid News
IEEE Press Releases
IEEE in the News
Public Policy
Brand Identity Toolkit
Smart Grid Jobs
Constructive Engagement Toolkit
 
IEEE launches smart grid Web portal, content-rich gateway providing intelligence, education and news on global smart grid
IEEE Smart Grid brings multidisciplinary expertise and coordination to global effort
PISCATAWAY, N.J., USA, JANUARY 19, 2010 – IEEE, the world's largest technical professional association, today launched the IEEE Smart Grid Web Portal, an integrated gateway to Smart Grid intelligence, education and news from IEEE and other expert sources. The Web Portal is designed for manufacturers, policymakers, educators, academics, governments, engineers, computer scientists, researchers and other stakeholders in the power and energy, information technology (IT), and communications industries.
The IEEE Smart Grid Web Portal is the first phase of IEEE Smart Grid, created to bring together IEEE's broad array of resources to provide expertise and guidance for those involved in Smart Grid worldwide.
 
"Contributions from across the global power and energy, communications and IT industries, as well as government and academia, are needed to ensure successful implementation of Smart Grid throughout the world. The IEEE Smart Grid Web Portal is designed to be an essential resource for anyone involved in Smart Grid, whatever their industry or technical discipline," said Wanda Reder, 2008-09 president of the IEEE Power & Energy Society and chair of the IEEE Smart Grid Task Force. "With our unmatched diversity of expertise, richness of programs and proven standards-development capability, IEEE is the obvious global entity to take on a unifying role in the global Smart Grid arena."
The term "Smart Grid" refers to the next-generation, managed electrical power system that leverages increased use of communications and information technology in the generation, delivery and consumption of electrical energy. The new IEEE Smart Grid initiative will organize, coordinate, leverage and build upon the strength of various entities within and outside of IEEE with Smart Grid expertise and interest.
"The Smart Grid is a revolutionary undertaking, entailing new capabilities for communications and control, integration of new energy sources, distributed generation and adoption of a regulatory structure," said Erich Gunther, Chairman and CTO with EnerNex and member of the Department of Energy (DOE) GridWise Architecture Council. "Successful roll-out requires a phenomenal diversity of expertise and experience, proven standards-development capability and shared vision."
Added Steve Diamond, member of the IEEE Board of Directors and past president of the IEEE Computer Society: "Given its global representation across the technology spectrum, IEEE is ideally positioned to deliver thought leadership and coordination to Smart Grid."
IEEE Smart Grid leverages IEEE's long-term commitment to global modernization and optimization of the power grid to make it more reliable, efficient, secure and environmentally neutral. IEEE leverages its strong technical foundation to develop standards, best practices, publications, conferences and educational opportunities in Smart Grid:
Standards—IEEE has more than 100 standards published and in development that are crucial to the Smart Grid, spanning digital information and controls technology, networking, security, reliability, assessment, interconnection of distributed resources including renewable energy sources to the grid, sensors, electric metering, Broadband over Power Line (BPL) and systems engineering.
For example, IEEE. C37.118 is the standard specifying how phasor measurement units (PMUs) are interconnected to help manage the transmission system. According to the DOE, $348 million of U.S. stimulus funding plus matching funds for a total investment of $877 million will go to 11 projects involving installing PMUs. That translates to over 668 PMUs using the IEEE C37.118 standard to ensure interoperability is achieved. Also, IEEE P2030 working group is creating a guide for understanding and defining interoperability of the electric power system with end-use applications, and work is underway for the formal recognition of Distributed Network Protocol (DNP3) as an IEEE standard designed to promote interoperability in Smart Grid and other applications. More information on approved IEEE Smart Grid standards and standards in development can be found at http://smartgrid.ieee.org/standards.
Conferences—IEEE annually hosts more than 850 conferences throughout the world where information and best practices are exchanged. Over the last four years, more than 100 Smart Grid technical sessions have been offered. The IEEE Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference continues today through Jan. 21 at NIST in Gaithersburg, Md. Attendees are discussing power and energy-system applications, cyber- and physical-security systems, wide-area protection in energy systems, smart sensing and advanced metering infrastructure and smart-grid standards.
Publications—Nearly 2,500 papers focused on the smart grid have been published in more than 40 IEEE journals, and IEEE this year will launch two new cross-disciplinary and archival journals, "IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid" and "IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy."
Educational programs—IEEE courses, webinars and public outreach forums on Smart Grid technology and public policy take into account the needs of various audiences throughout the world, including technical and non-technical professionals and students.
To become involved in IEEE Smart Grid and learn more about the technical and public policy aspects of the Smart Grid and renewable energy, please visit http://smartgrid.ieee.org/get-involved.
About IEEE
IEEE is the world's largest technical professional association. Through its more than 375,000 members in 160 countries, IEEE is a leading authority on a wide variety of areas ranging from aerospace systems, computers and telecommunications to biomedical engineering, electric power and consumer electronics. Dedicated to the advancement of technology, IEEE publishes 30 percent of the world's literature in the electrical and electronics engineering and computer science fields, and has developed nearly 900 active industry standards. The organization annually sponsors more than 850 conferences worldwide. Additional information about IEEE can be found at http://www.ieee.org.
 
 
inShare
Tweet
