




























首页 | 招聘会 | 应届生BBS | 开心应届生| 求职正装 | 应届生旅社

个人中心简历管理职位搜索企业登陆 地区.





位置: 应届生求职网 - 马士基（中国）航运有限公司上海分公司 - 马士基南京业务运营部---营运协调 - 职位详细 



马士基南京业务运营部---营运协调(马士基（中国）航运有限公司南京分公司，营运部)

马士基（中国）航运有限公司上海分公司
所属行业： 交通/运输/物流企业规模：101-500人企业性质： 外企独资

马士基南京业务运营部---营运协调详情




职位性质：

兼职/实习

有效日期：

2012年12月12日 至 2013年03月24日



招聘人数：

多人 



工作地点：

南京



马士基南京业务运营部---营运协调职位描述：



 

Maersk Line – the undisputed leader in container transport. Maersk Line facilitates global trade, operating in more than 125 countries and employing over 21,000 people. For the right candidates we offer attractive career opportunities. Our philosophy is unity through diversity; we strive to be locally relevant and globally efficient. We remain firmly rooted in core values that have been ours for more than 100 years. With hundreds of container vessels operating around the clock, we want to act responsibly to improve our environmental performance and impact. This means constantly improving processes and developing technologies to be more energy efficient, eliminating waste and reducing emissions. We engage actively in the communities we serve, focusing on education and humanitarian aid, with local projects executed in close collaboration with NGOs and relevant authorities.
 Maersk Line is part of the A.P. Moller - Maersk Group which employs over 120,000 people across a varied range of container services, energy, offshore & shipping and retail activities.
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
马士基南京业务运营部 
职位：营运协调
 
WE OFFER
 Working opportunity in world no.1 shipping company
 Touch on the core essence of container business
 Vast on-job/E-learning/off-line learning opportunities of shipping industry and international trade
 In-depth understanding of the Yangtze export mode and local routines
 Project leadership/participation of process improvement tools oriented from lean & six sigma
 Networking with various internal commercial desks
 Working with 20+ terminal/container yard suppliers along the 3rd longest river in the world - Yangtze river
 Monitoring 10+ barge/railway/trucking suppliers performance in the intermodal transport
 Job rotation opportunities in subject to personal development plan and business needs
 Harmonious supporting atmosphere from an energetic and pragmatic team
 
KEY RESPONSIBILITIES
 Manage barge, railway and truck service for inland ports along Yangtze River and facilitate barge and mother vessel connection at Shanghai port.
 Organize equipment flow for inland ports along Yangtze River.
 Maintain relevant system operations accurately and timely.
 Initiate and implement customers experience enhancement, environment sustainability, profits making and cost saving ideas with process excellence mindset.
 Evaluate Suppliers performance.
 Coordinate to collect 3rd party repair cost.
 

PEOPLE WE ARE LOOKING FOR
 
Confident, proactive and self-driven person full of passion and sense of responsibilities
 Active team player, easy-going with open minds
 Brilliant communication and interpersonal skills
 Excellent oral and written English
  




 加入求职记事本 |该公司其他职位 | 推荐给好友| 向应届生举报该职位！

 求职tips：提高警惕识破虚假招聘 






马士基（中国）航运有限公司上海分公司简介


Maersk (China) Shipping Co., Ltd. Shanghai Branch
 
Maersk (China) Shipping Co., Ltd. was established in 1994. Dedicated to liner shipping business with Maersk Line as her brand name, the company is one of the biggest business entities whole-owned by the A.P. Moller – Maersk Group in China. 

Shanghai Branch is the management and business center of the East China Cluster within business scope of Maersk Line. 

The East China Cluster comprises of altogether 15 offices covering Maersk Line’s business at the Yangtze Delta Area and along the Yangtze River, having around 500 dedicated staff serving around 10,000 clients and contributing over 1/3 of the total volumes that are shipped out of China through Maersk Line’s vessels.
 
Maersk Line is one of the biggest liner shipping companies in the world.
 
At any point in time, Maersk Line is transporting cargo worth approximately 3% of the world’s GNP (gross national product) 

*Read more
 The A.P. Moller - Maersk Group:www.maersk.com
 Maersk Line:www.maerskline.com 



企业网址：

http://www.maerskline.com




 






应届生求职网 | 合作伙伴 | 企业免费注册说明 | 帮助指南 | 友情链 | 联系我们
 应届生求职网(YingJieSheng.COM) © 2005—2013 All Right Reserved 
增值电信业务经营许可证沪B2-20070147 | 上海市公安局徐汇分局网监中心备案编号：3101040220
 


