


.












.




 
How Travel Changed My Life (& Could Change Yours Too)



If you had told me three years ago that I would be writing this now from a colonial casita in Merida, Mexico, I would have responded “Yeah, right…”. But just over three months into a seven-month trip, here I am – and I won’t ever say “Yeah, right…” again. Travel has changed my life. And I think it could change yours too.
 
Travel (especially long-term travel) isn’t for everyone. If you’ve thought about it and are on the fence when it comes to traveling, however, I can assure you that the experiences, benefits and perspective you get are too good to miss. Here are some of the most life-changing aspects I’ve experienced over the past few months:


Read full story · Comments { 16 }
 

Why Waiting to Change Your Life Can Be Dangerous



There are days that your life will change forever, in an instant, never to be the same again. You don’t know it is coming. You haven’t prepared for it. It just happens to you. I had one of those days a couple of years ago.
 
I was facilitating a meeting for a group of Self Employed Women. As we were having lunch my phone rang and my husband’s name flashed up on the screen. “That’s strange” I thought. He never phones me if he knows I am running a business meeting. But when I answered it wasn’t my husband’s voice at the end of the line. It was a paramedic.


Read full story · Comments { 37 }
 

Why You Can’t Live Without Passion



I was watching a movie the other day called, “Peaceful Warrior.” There’s a character in that movie called, “Socrates.” He’s a very wise and intelligent guy. One of the things he said really caught my attention. He said, “Death isn’t sad. The sad thing is: most people don’t live at all.”
 
Most people don’t live. It seems almost esoteric or new agey to say something like that. But deep inside, I know it’s really true. Most people’s lives flash before their eyes. They go day in and day out just going through the movements. They’re not really… living.


Read full story · Comments { 30 }
 

How Death Changed My Life (& Why It’s Important to Think About Yours)



For most of my life, I kept a tragedy to myself. An event that I witnessed at a young age altered my thinking forever. It fueled the way I approach life. In recent years, I began sharing how death changed my life.
 
When I was a freshman in high school, I saw a good friend of mine die. Paul Kartlick was playing basketball in PE class one day and tripped. He hit his head on the outdoor concrete court and died on the spot. One moment we were playing basketball and the next moment he was gone. He was 14 years old.


Read full story · Comments { 23 }
 

How $16 Changed My Life



Before going any further into this post, I want to clarify two things: 1) This is not a product or promotion I’m pushing that costs $16; 2) This is a very low point in my life that I haven’t shared with many people. Now, with full disclosure out of the way, I’ll tell you what the title is all about.
 
In the summer of 2008, I worked as a sales trainer for a small marketing firm in Nashville, TN. Although during my career there I would work in over 7 different campaigns, at the time I was selling and training salespeople for a retail promotion involving At&t’s home services inside their cellular stores. Do you remember going into an At&t store and someone coming up asking you about your home phone service? Could have been me or someone I trained.


Read full story · Comments { 48 }
 

Journaling for the Body and Soul



All I could see was the blank page. I found myself staring at the journal that lay open on my lap. It was the third time in a week I’d made an attempt to start writing in my new journal and I was determined to begin with something other than ‘Dear Diary.’ Several minutes, one headache, and three aspirin later I closed the journal and decided I’d try again tomorrow when I was fresh. 

The morning rolls around and I sit staring at that wretched blank page which just stares right back at me as if to say, “How many times are we going to go through this?” Finally I caved and I wrote, ‘Dear Diary,’ in black pen. Suddenly, the words that wouldn’t come flowed easily. I wrote for an hour. Who knew I had so much to say? I was fascinated.


Read full story · Comments { 48 }
 

Are You Really Ready to Change?



How do you feel when you look at your life right now – how your day has been lived, the way you look, the things you’ve done and are doing, where you are, the people you’re around, the life you’ve laid, the thoughts that surround you?
 
If there are things you want to change in any part of your life there’s something you need to know.
 
And it’s not pretty: Change isn’t for everyone. Change isn’t easy.


Read full story · Comments { 24 }
 

Authentic Change and the Role of Choice



Everywhere you look, in popular magazines and on media websites like the Huffington Post, there seem to be countless articles outlining the five or six essential steps to follow for some type of self-improvement. Americans are fixated on personal growth — becoming more effective in their professions, happier and more tranquil in their private lives, less depressed with higher self-esteem and a more satisfying sex life. The website on which you’re reading this post is devoted to promoting change. We all want to grow and change for the better.
 
In my experience, however, most people change very little over the course of their lives. They tend to become more the way they already are.


Read full story · Comments { 14 }
 
1 2 … 76 Next →







About    |    Start Here    |    Archives




Get Free Email Updates

Join over 20,000 people who get free email updates plus receive access to exclusive resources to help you change your life.





 













Follow @_TheChangeBlog 

Follow @PeterClemens 

Popular
Latest
Comments


How To Be A Better Person

How to Use Your Subconscious to Change Your Life

How Gratitude Can Change Your Life

24 Daily Habits

Why You Should Move Away

10 Wise Choices to Skyrocket Your Happiness

How To Meditate (& Why it May Help You Overcome Depression)

How Extreme Focus Can Change Your Life



































 






















Site Related

 Archives
 Audiobook Addicts
 Bookstore
 Guest Posts
 Life Change Quotes
 Resources
 .

.








.
 
