Student Life in College: Negative Experience Can Ruin Your Life

Jun 20, 2010
0
138






Tweet



Ads by Google

Brain Training Games Improve memory and attention with scientific brain games. www.lumosity.com

找工作,上智联招聘 马上注册,让工作主动找上门. 月薪3000-8000，更有高端猎头职位！ www.zhaopin.com

Fastest VPN for Asia Unblock all sites. Try Risk Free. 100% Secure & Anonymous. Easy Setup ExpressVPN.com

High School Online Self-paced online courses help you Finish High School your way. www.aiuhs.org

Education Research Full-text education books, articles, journals at Questia. www.Questia.com/Education





 Related Articles 

Important Information for Freshmen About Life in College

Student Life in College: Things to Know about On-campus Living

Student Life in College: Combining Talent, Learning, and Hobby

Student Life in College: Things to Know about College Friendship

Students are interesting people because they are like little children. When a child learns something new, you never know when he/she can introduce the acquired information. The same happens with the students that accumulate new information and wait for an appropriate moment to demonstrate the skills and experience. As a rule, examinations are aimed at making all students demonstrate what they know. However, some students may demonstrate some mediocre results during the student life in college, while the career benefits from the typhoon of their skills and experience. You never know what situation in life can make a person do something. Skills and Experience Your skills and experience acquired in college can be beneficial in future even if you do not know what this information is relevant for. Do not confuse the experience necessary for your future job and career and negative experience that can ruin all your efforts and strategy. Drugs and alcohol are the main prohibitions that are advertised in the modern college-themed movies. It is natural that all students think that the college suggests a life of an adult. However, being less bound in making a choice a person becomes responsible for all consequences of his/her actions. Legal responsibility is an additional chapter in the book of life. Volunteers Do not think that only nerds can be volunteers or take an active part in social activities. The life of the college community has to become an integral part of your life as well. As soon as you realize that you belong to something more global than you, yourself, and your majesty, you can feel the consequences of your decisions and actions. The college life suggests a great number of topics to consider and reconsider. More freedom involves more responsibility. Your parents and friends cannot be responsible for your actions when you think that you are an adult.

