








Login
Login via 







Register


ADHD
Childhood Education
College and University
History
Homeschooling
International Studies
K-12 Education
Languages
More Categories 
More in 
Learning Disabilities
Online Education
Science
Tutoring



Home Page
 Education
Print article
Career Planning: Is Career Planning Helpful Or Harmful?

May 29, 2010
0






Tweet



Ads by Google

Career Partners Intl. Result-driven outplacement programs land your people on their feet www.cpiworld.com

High School Online Self-paced online courses help you Finish High School your way. www.aiuhs.org

最新招聘信息,尽在智联招聘 日均在线职位300万,让你找工作不用愁! 1分钟注册,轻松找到属于你的好工作 www.zhaopin.com

School Education Show 660 Exhibitors from 30+ Countries Why not Check Now & Meet Yours? www.cieet.com

在线学英语完全免费 互动语言课程帮您真正提高语言技能 现在加入，与全球各国学员共同进步！ www.Busuu.com/English




Career planning is quite disputable question. Some people think it is essential for achieving one's life goals. Some argue that it is a waste of time. But who is right? Can career planning be helpful? Or vice versa can it be harmful? It is time to decide.


 Related Articles 

Importance of Career Planning---mapping our Future

The Importance of Career Planning When in School

Development A Career Plan, Tips For Novices

Career Planning - 1000's of Jobs linked to Courses and Salary

Can career planning be helpful?
 
Basically, career planning is defining one's major life goals and keeping to this plan. Such plans are made up for 5 or ten years. This is quite a long period. It is quite difficult to predict what your life will be even in a day. However, it is possible to formulate your objectives. One can define what he wants to achieve. Why not to put some deadlines in this case? Actually, these deadlines can only motivate the person to moving forward and never stop.
 
Career planning can bring order in one's career. Career planning defines the major goals to be achieved. It also depicts what extra knowledge one may need to achieve his/her goals. For instance, if some post presupposes some additional education or course one will have time to do it. Career planning help to be more prepared. Even if some changes occur in one's life. It is also possible to re-work a little one's plan to achieve the major goals.
 
Can career planning be harmful?
 
There can be, of course, the case when career planning can be hypothetically harmful. For instance, a person can be too addicted to his/her plan. He/she can ignore some brilliant opportunity to reach more success, but this person will stick to plan. Though it is hardly possible, isn't it? May be someone calls making such plan a waste of time? But are few hours such a big waste? You can spend few hours to make the plan and few hours to update it. Nothing crucial for career can happen in those few hours. Instead proper career plan can keep you prepared and committed to achieving your objectives.


Ads by Google
 
Career planning is quite disputable question. Some people think it is essential for achieving one's life goals. Some argue that it is a waste of time. But who is right? Can career planning be helpful? Or vice versa can it be harmful? It is time to decide.
 
Can career planning be helpful?
 
Basically, career planning is defining one's major life goals and keeping to this plan. Such plans are made up for 5 or ten years. This is quite a long period. It is quite difficult to predict what your life will be even in a day. However, it is possible to formulate your objectives. One can define what he wants to achieve. Why not to put some deadlines in this case? Actually, these deadlines can only motivate the person to moving forward and never stop.
 
Career planning can bring order in one's career. Career planning defines the major goals to be achieved. It also depicts what extra knowledge one may need to achieve his/her goals. For instance, if some post presupposes some additional education or course one will have time to do it. Career planning help to be more prepared. Even if some changes occur in one's life. It is also possible to re-work a little one's plan to achieve the major goals.
 
Can career planning be harmful?
 
There can be, of course, the case when career planning can be hypothetically harmful. For instance, a person can be too addicted to his/her plan. He/she can ignore some brilliant opportunity to reach more success, but this person will stick to plan. Though it is hardly possible, isn't it? May be someone calls making such plan a waste of time? But are few hours such a big waste? You can spend few hours to make the plan and few hours to update it. Nothing crucial for career can happen in those few hours. Instead proper career plan can keep you prepared and committed to achieving your objectives.





About the Author
More Sharing ServicesShare

Subscribe to RSS
Contact Author




Joey

Joey Chee is a professional researcher and writer in professional custom writing service. Upon graduation, he started a career in writing service and has been providing custom writing thesis help to students worldwide.


Tags:career planning
life goals
objectives


Rate this Article:

1
2
3
4
5
 0 vote(s)
Re-Publish articleSend to friend



Ads by Google

Hogan Assessment Systems Authorised Australian Distributor Profiling, Accreditation, Support www.peterberry.com.au

Find A Foreign Husband Serious Men Seek Chinese Ladies For Dating and Marriage. Join Free. AsianDating.com/Chinese

在家就能轻松赚钱 简单填问卷，轻松快速网赚。 无需任何专业背景，上网同时增加收入 www.surveycompare.cn

Aiman's Blog Rants, Poetry and Short Stories Writings of a slacker breakthehalo.blogspot.com/

The Ethereal Dimension Open your eyes to a world where energy is seen as a solid... www.thesoulnet.com



 



?
 CEThompson

Author BoxSubscribe to RSS
Contact Author



Joeyhas 56 articles online


More from Joey



Main Advantages and Disadvantages of Becoming a Teacher
in Education

Main Advantages and Disadvantages of Becoming a Pilot
in Education

Follow These DOs and DON'Ts to Pass Exam Successfully
in Education

Tips for Freshmen: How to Make College Life Interesting?
in Education


Latest Education Articles



Negotiations Training is Important at Negotiation Seminars and Negotiations Skills Training
by Andres Lares

Sales Training Seminars Will Teach Negotiations Skills and Sales Training
by Andres Lares

Sharpen your problem solving skills with a maths tutor Dubai
by SharonEvans

Massage Therapy Program: How do I Become a Massage Therapist?
by Michelle Janson






 


Need Help?Contact Us
FAQ
Submit Articles
Editorial Guidelines
Blog

Site LinksRecent Articles
Top Authors
Top Articles
Find Articles
Site Map
Mobile Version

WebmastersRSS Builder
RSS
Link to Us

Business InfoAdvertising

Other Languages:Portuguese
Spanish
French
Follow Us:
Share on facebookShare on twitterShare on google_followShare on rss


Use of this web site constitutes acceptance of the Terms Of Use and Privacy Policy | User published content is licensed under a Creative Commons License.
Copyright © 2005-2013 Free Articles by ArticlesBase.com, All rights reserved.

 



Further Readings & Images



 







