





Search

 


Home» Arts and Entertainment» Philosophy

 
Ads By Google ConsciousnessHealing Mind BodySubconscious MindHuman Mind The 



A.D. Upchurch 
Basic Author |   7 Articles
 Joined: January 20, 2013 


Was this article helpful? 00

 1





Ads by Google

How Can I Find God?
everystudent.com
The Bible Explains How To Find God. Begin Your Relationship Right Now.

Your Zodiac Horoscope
AboutAstro.com
Insert Your Birthdate & Get Answers about Past-Present and Future. Free

Wisdom Inspired Life
wisdominspiredlife.com/#home
Share Contribute Learn Grow Open to Diverse Views & Experiences

Gabriel's Trumpet
www.gabriels-trumpet.com
From Israel - anointing oils, prayer shawls, shofars and more

Looking for True Love?
GodLife.com/TrueLove
Find True Love in God This Prayer is For You

Discover YOUR Purpose
www.pastorwoman.com
Free daily power from the Word Written or Podcast direct to you

Discover Neurotheology
www.WebMindful.org
Virtual Religion in the 21st Cent. The original, world famous classic

Knowing your Personality
www.personalitybook.com
Most detailed Personality Assessment on the Internet

最新招聘信息,尽在智联招聘
www.zhaopin.com
日均在线职位300万,让你找工作不用愁! 1分钟注册,轻松找到属于你的好工作

Sermon Outlines
www.PreachIt.org/Sermon-Outlines
Download Motivational Sermon Outlines Now. Inspire Your Church!

Healing for the Broken
www.JourneyAnswers.com
Is your life shattered and Broken? There is someone who can fix it!

Coptic Orthodox Heritage
www.coptologia.com
From St Mark to Athanasius, from Pharaonic to Coptic. See it here!

Chakra Clearing Devices
www.energy-healingarts.com
Bioresonance Healing Sabers Heals Aura, Chakras & Chi Flow

想当空姐、空哥、飞行员吗?
www.hkxyedu.cn
初高中生男女均可报名,年薪可达20万! 北京十大国办航空学校,重点大学校本部
 




Subconscious Consciousness

 By A.D. Upchurch 




Ads by Google

3-Minute Chakra Test Take the Free Chakra Test to Find Out Which of Your Chakras Are Weak
www.ChakraHealing.com

The Subconscious Mind Develop Your Subconscious Mind Download Free Training Today !
www.SilvaIntuitionSystem.com

How to Do Meditation? Did You Know That Meditating Just 15 Min a Day Could Change Your Life
www.SilvaLifeSystem.com



"You are an explorer, and you represent our species, and the greatest good you can do is to bring back a new idea, because our world is endangered by the absence of good ideas. Our world is in crisis because of the absence of consciousness." 
Terence McKenna

We have been familiar with the external world as being some sort of projection of the inner world. Similar to looking into a mirror of some sort. So, with this being said: "What is consciousness?" Can we consciously say it can be looked at as an act of waking up, from the bed?

There is so much information going around nowadays. Information from the internet, libraries, somewhat on the television and in movies. There is also plenty of propaganda going around, wanting to control consciousness or information for that matter.

He looks at her and says: "The mind is like a universe, many connections are being made, even if I did not approve those connections." She says in return: "All connections are pre-approved by the subconscious--the dark side of consciousness."

Everything that is looked at has a story, but our consciousness only picks up 3% etc of the story. The rest of the story is automatically picked up by our subconsciousness, by default. Using our 3% etc consciousness, we can delve into the sub-consciousness with awareness to build our conscious consciousness. We are divine beings, so everything is always working, either for us or against us.

We put on different clothes and the reflection is that we put on different ego's? Clothes can help us to feel a certain way(s), which plenty of articles can be found about this. Also, there are plenty of articles written about color vibrations. The rabbit hole of ego goes just as deep, possibly even deeper. In the Garden of Eden story it states that Adam and Eve were naked (No ego). Later on after eating of the fruit, they felt ashamed.

Genesis 3:7 American King James Version 
And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons. 

Why do a lot of us, after picking up a little knowledge, feel superior to others? Have you heard the saying: "Never let your left hand know what your right hand is doing?" How could you not let your left hand know, considering they occupy the same body? We can say that the left hand symbolizes the ego (lower self), while the right symbolizes silence (truer self). No one knows exactly all the details the womb goes through with producing a child and connecting a soul. Someone may know, but they are not amongst the masses. This is simply my opinion about silence giving birth to new knowledge, original knowledge; thus, wisdom. This being the process from the illusion of knowledge.

When one is seeking knowledge, it is very important not to become attached to the information. Attachments are what create ego's. When the ego thinks it is conscious, it can be quite detrimental to the being. When one let's their left hand know what their right is doing, the knowledge obtained prior has become contaminated and heavy--It loses all of it's nutrients.

Consciousness is the act of waking up inside oneself through awareness. One can have all of the knowledge in the world and still not know anything. Thus, If we are not conscious of what's being in-taken; then, our subconsciousness picks it up. Nothing is truly forgotten about when it comes to the subconsciousness. The subconsciousness remembers everything from birth, and possibly even past lives. Deja Vu!

So many of us have been programmed at an early age to act certain ways, think certain ways etc. But can a program be conscious of itself. I think not, for the simple fact that a program has been programmed to act as that program only. Becoming conscious may be painful at times, because we are going against what we have been taught etc. Becoming conscious also implies getting out of our comfort zones every now and then. Also, stating that we do not know anything and meaning it, which also takes power from the ego. Humility is a very big part of consciousness.

Sin                               VirtuesLust (excessive sexual appetites) Chastity (purity)Gluttony (over-indulgence)        Temperance (self-restraint)Greed (avarice)                   Charity (giving)Sloth (laziness/idleness)         Diligence (zeal/integrity/Labor)Wrath (anger)                     Forgiveness (composure)Envy (jealousy)                   Kindness (admiration)Pride (vanity)                    Humility (humbleness)

Consciousness is something we grow into overtime, and not something we receive all at one time. What I think we are doing is getting back to the heart that a baby has, a child has, as they shine to the world.


http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=qjfaoe847qQ

Article Source: http://EzineArticles.com/?expert=A.D._Upchurch
 










Did you find this article helpful? 00

 1

 


Ads by Google

How to Do Meditation?
www.SilvaLifeSystem.com
Did You Know That Meditating Just 15 Min a Day Could Change Your Life

A Relationship With God
everystudent.com
This Explains How You Can Begin A Personal Relationship With God Now!

3-Minute Chakra Test
www.ChakraHealing.com
Take the Free Chakra Test to Find Out Which of Your Chakras Are Weak

Your Zodiac Horoscope
AboutAstro.com/horoscope
Insert Your Birthdate & Get Answers about Past-Present and Future. Free

Wisdom Inspired Life
wisdominspiredlife.com/#home
Share Contribute Learn Grow Open to Diverse Views & Experiences

Looking for True Love?
GodLife.com/TrueLove
Find True Love in God This Prayer is For You

Discover Neurotheology
www.WebMindful.org
Virtual Religion in the 21st Cent. The original, world famous classic




Get Involved

 0 comments Suggest a topic 


Article Tools

 Print this article E-mail to a friend EzinePublisher Report this article Cite this article 


Stay Informed





Subscribe to New Article Alerts:


 Arts and Entertainment: Philosophy 
A.D. Upchurch 

Email Address:

Subscribe



 Philosophy Article Feed 

Ads By Google ConsciousnessHealing Mind BodySubconscious MindHuman Mind The 


Find More Articles




Search





Recent Articles
The Creation Of A Winner
In Defense of God: The Classics
I'm Not Crazy, He Said But Is He a Good Judge of That - About As Irrelevant As An Elephant
When 2-D Infinite Worlds Collide, Intersect, and Divide
Why Be Moral: A Short Discussion of Ethical Motivation
Emotional IQ Is Not What Your Think It Is
Platonic Fullerene Chemistry, Nanotechnology, Liberty, Freedom, Science and the US Constitution
The Concept Of Peace And Action, Not So Much Peace And War
Discursivity and Precie on Immortal Philosophy Nominae
The Paradoxes Of Zeno




 




Submitted On February 24, 2013. Viewed 10 times. Word count: 786.


 
Ads By Google ConsciousnessHealing Mind BodySubconscious MindHuman Mind The 







EzineArticles.com

© 2013 SparkNET
All Rights Reserved Worldwide
About Us
FAQ
Contact Us
Member Benefits
Privacy Policy
Shop
Site Map
Blog
Training
Video Library
Advertising
Affiliates
Cartoons



Authors
Submit Articles
Members Login
Premium Membership
Expert Authors
Endorsements
Editorial Guidelines
Terms of Service



Publishers

Follow Us
Terms Of Service
Ezines / Email Alerts
Manage Subscriptions
EzineArticles RSS


 











