The Intelligent Shortcut to Better Jobs:


While MOST executive job seekers promote themselves as 'previously employed', aim to promote yourself as 'current and relevant'.  How?  Get a distinctive, no-nonsense resume that helps you rank ahead and move your career forward.Welcome to Resumes For Leaders - Winning Executive Resumes Since 1984Client Testimonials:


"Wanted to let you know that the resume you helped me develop worked wonders.  I received 3 senior level offers and had other companies interested in me.  I was at a point that I had to turn away recruiters."
- Aaron C., VP Professional Services


"You have effectively crafted a document that conveys 25 years of type A behavior into an impressive set of accomplishments." - J.K., CIO 


"I used your resume to get an unbelievable offer.  My new employer was thoroughly impressed with my presentation." - Jeffrey C., CFO 


"I found my "perfect job" in less than 2 weeks with a 35% increase in salary!  Thank you." - John S., Operations Mgr 


"My attitude was a little skeptical ... but I am now your fan for life. The strategies worked so well ... an incredible formula!" - Beth L., Telecom Exec


"You did a great job on my resume; it made my search easier and assisted me in getting the job I wanted.  Thanks!" - T.M., Human Resources Executive


"I accepted the position of Head of Technology. I wanted to thank you for all your assistance and let you know that you played a significant part in this process." - J.F., CIO


"The very first resume generated a call from a prominent recruiter." - Darren Y., AVP


"This exceeded my expectations, I am more than pleased with the result." - Paul R., VP Technology


"I just started a new job this week ... I feel like an immense weight has been lifted off and that I can now focus on really making the most of my career. Thank you." - P.M., Tech Exec







Is Your Resume Compelling to Employers?


The majority of resumes are written using typical formats that make them look 'average'.  It's common for a talented executive with excellent credentials to appear mediocre because of a boilerplate resume.  Don't let this happen to you!


To make the short list for top jobs, promote what differentiates you from other qualified applicants.  When your resume persuasively communicates your unique executive strengths, employers see YOU as a preferred candidate. Time to Upgrade Your Resume?


If you are getting enough interviews and excellent job offers, don't change your resume.  If you are not getting as many suitable offers as you should, then your resume probably needs a makeover. A powerful resume magnifies your marketability and positions you as a candidate of choice.  


As a rule, if your resume was updated more than a year ago, or was done by someone without executive recruitment experience, it may be lacking the essential strategies for promoting your career in this market.   


Here's why over 50,000 executives choose our service for their resume:


We have only top-notch resume writers with hiring backgrounds. 
First-hand knowledge of current executive job trends. 
Resume success rate of 99% based on client results. 
Interactive client phone interviews (no time-wasting questionnaires). 
Powerful, customized resume content preferred by recruiters. 


The bottom line: Executives who use our professional resumes rank ahead and get better jobs.  


When it comes to your career, it pays to do it right. The one-time total investment in properly revamping your resume is as low as $495 (about a day's pay for executives). Get your Free review and quote below.  



The 5 Ingredients of Winning Resumes:


If you want better results in this job market, make certain that your executive resume includes all of these 5 ingredients:

1. Awareness of Key Issues:   Your practical understanding of key industry challenges.  
2. Value Proposition:   What exactly do you offer and where can you fit in the value chain. 
3. Competitive Advantage:   Why you are a better choice than other qualified executives. 
4. Leadership Dynamics:   How your specific leadership style can benefit organizations. 
5. Executive Promise:  Persuasive synopsis of your tangible and sustainable solutions.  


By starting your job search with a proper resume that reads like a compelling executive proposal instead of "old news", you get higher quality interviews and better job offers.  

        About Our Service: 
.  Professional organization
.  Over 28 years of experience
.  #1 in customer referrals
.  Executive career experts
.  Full-time qualified writers
.  50,000+ winning resumes
.  Highest 99% success rate
.  No forms or questionnaires
.  Interactive phone interviews
.  Custom resume documents
.  Approved by top recruiters
.  Affordable flat-fee service





Resumes For Leaders
The Most Referred Executive Resume Service


"Resumes For Intelligent, Success-Focused Executives" Professional resume services
Effective executive resumes
Call Toll Free: (877) 518-EXECWe respect your privacy.  Your resume will be confidentially reviewed only by one of our trusted and qualified resume experts.  We never spam and never use your contact information for any other purpose than to provide resume feedback and respond to your questions.





Over 50,000 World-Class Executive Resumes Approved By Top RecruitersCopyright (C) Resumes For Leaders (a division of Best Services Career Management Company).  All rights reserved.

Get a free candid resume review, professional recommendations, and price quote for a proper makeover.  No cost, no obligation.


Submit your resume here >>>



What Is The Next Step? 
Get Your FREE Resume Review and Quote:




