

JOB

 
Home




 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------




The level of efficiency of document archiving



 
Today the basis of any commercial activity is invoice. According legislative acts the company is required to supply an invoice to the customer to get paid. The principal interests of both customer and supplier include the payment receive for product or service provided or the job completed. The time of invoice delivery may influence the time of working process and, as consequence, profit and success of the company. Document archiving also means a lot for successful working process. Very often employees of global companies have to deal with ancient documents.
 Nowadays, information technologies era offers us incredible opportunities. Computer, making thousands different operations in one second, helps us considerably increase the speed of work.
 For large companies the best solution could become e-invoicing as part of working process automation. Unfortunately, in most countries legal system requires that any company engaged in commercial activity provides to customers only originals of documents. For instance, each company in Russia has its official stamp or seal. Without this stamp an invoice, contract or another document has nolegal force.
 Learn more about scanning software.
 Therefore, two main reasons leading us to working process automationare indicated. All we need to do is to get the data of document from any source, scan-copy or paper, save it at the hard drive and transfer the necessary information to the customer.
 Just think about the time wasted on inputting all the information from a paper invoice form with 15 products. Usually it takes from 5 to 7 minutes to input this data manually. Also you shouldnt forget the necessity of information check that also will take much time. Imagine that a very attentive and fast worker will need eight hours to input 100 invoices manually. Even a small company daily having one or two hundred sheets needs a person who will work 40 hours per week only on this task. Now think about the company that each day has to deal with few thousands of documents. Besides, it usually takes much time to find a necessary document. Using previous numbers we can make some calculations and see that to input 10 000 papers the organization will need one hundred people. This way, document archiving as part of corporate automation system is indispensable.
 Document treatment automation may become a very advantageous solution of this problem. It may help to save time, money and efforts. Employees will not need to do routine work. Cognitive Forms invoice capture software requires only four seconds to process an invoice.
 Applying this solution you may considerably increase the speed of working process. Your employees will have a significant part of free time to solve issues of a higher importance.
 Visit our website http://cognitiveforms.com/ to get more information.


Jobs For Teens



 


If your teen is looking for a job, there are several options. Having a job means that teens can learn to manage their own money and learn responsibility. Keep in mind that the best job for your teen is the one that fits their needs the best. Here are some of the most common jobs for teens- 
Babysitting-This common job is often overlooked, but it should be noted that babysitting is a big responsibility that is best for mature young adults. For teens who want to earn top dollar, one way to prove you can be a trusted babysitter is to take classes that help train you for child sitting. The Red Cross offers babysitter’s training courses that instruct you on infant and older child care, problem solving skills, first aid for injuries, illnesses and accidents and basic safety. Check your local Red Cross for the details. Retail-Jobs in retail stores are highly sought after by many teeagers. Between the excitement of being in their favorite place (the mall), and a healthy discount, teens love to work retail. However, you need to understand that these positions can be hard to get in some places where adults are competing for the same jobs. You should also keep in mind, that many retail places require some sort of prior work experience. Depending on the store and state law, the minimum age for workers may be 16 or 18. Pet Sitting or Dog Walking-For teens who love animals, dog sitting or walking can be great options. You will likely find yourself working in early morning and evening hours, which can also make this job a great option for having during the school year. Best of all people love their animals and are often willing to pay top dollar, for great care, from someone they trust. Food Service-Jobs at restaurants, diners or fast food places are nice options for teens because they can make a quick buck. While the hours can be long, the pay can be substantial for a teen who willing to work hard. Camp Counselor-There are many camp counselor positions that are available through churches, schools and sporting or youth organizations. These jobs are ideal for teens that are looking to work during summer vacation. And if you like kids, and want to work with them, this job can be highly rewarding. In addition, for teens looking to add to college resumes, this job is a nice standout. Landscaping and Yard Work-Many landscaping and yard care companies, hire extra help during the summer months. You can get on with one of these businesses, or strike out and start your own. Many people are to busy to do yard work and will pay well, for someone who is willing to show up on time and do the work. However, you may need to invest in a lawn mower or other equipment, if your clients don’t have their own, though, so consider your startup costs. Government Jobs-You may be surprised to learn that your teen can work for the government. There are many local city and state governments that offer jobs that are specifically geared towards teenagers. These jobs can include such things as: life guarding or corn de-tassling. Check StudentJobs.gov for local listings. Tutoring-This is an ideal job for a teen who is looking to work, during the school year, without having to give up too much free time. If your teen is interested, encourage them to check with your school’s guidance office, to find out if there are students in need of their tutoring services. They should also inquire about grade requirements for such positions. 


Build a Bear Workshop Online Job Application



 


If you would like to join a company that values and appreciates each and every employee then you might want to visit the Build-A-Bear website. You can fill out an online job application with the Build-A-Bear Company and discover the fun and rewards of being part of an organization that wants to help you their employees succeed and advance.

Build-A-Bear has many store locations and you can visit the company site to check for an opening that matches your skills, experience and educational background. This organization has been recognized as one of the top 100 companies to work for..

The company has warehouse and distribution centers located in both Columbus and Groveport Ohio. Interested applicants can choose to apply for a job in one of the warehouses or as a sales associate at one of the Ohio store locations. The Build-A-Bear online job application is a quick and easy process and you do not have to send a resume to be considered for many of the openings that are available.

If you are at least in your junior year of college and you are majoring in one of the following fields you can apply for an internship at the company headquarters in Saint Louis, Missouri.

* Accounting/Finance

* Information Technology

* Marketing

* International Business

* Human Resources

* Merchandise Planning/Distribution/Development

Interns must spend at least 10 weeks working at World Bear head quarters. All living expenses are paid by the student intern while they train and learn real world business procedures and strategies

Before you fill out one of the Build-A-Bear online job applications you should look through the benefits package provided to all employees. If you were uncertain about whether or not to apply for a job these outstanding employee benefits may persuade you to complete the application quickly. These comprehensive plans include health and wellness benefits, paid time off, bonuses, life insurance, disability insurance, merchandise discounts, scholarship programs and savings and retirement benefits.


Preparing Accounting Resumes and Cover Letters



 


Accounting jobs are always in demand because accounts are always maintained by every organization and institute. Accounting jobs are of different types. In every business enterprise there will be a minimum of 2 accounting departments, namely, cost accounting and financial accounting. Both these departments depend on each other for records and data and their performances are mutually influential.

While applying for an accounting job you should give special attention towards resume creation. You should also be prepared to handle all the necessary correspondence that you might have with your prospective employer. You should start preparing for your resume soon after you receive the job notice. Prior to your interview, you should also prepare sample copies of future correspondence like thank you letters, job acceptance letters and other follow-up letters. If you are prepared in advance, it will be easy for you to make necessary changes while sending them. From the above mentioned documents, your accounting cover letter should be treated as one of the most important items. Your cover letter should describe the overall goal of your resume and your special eligibility standards.

There are various levels of accounting jobs and depending on your qualification and experience you can apply for different posts. If you are applying for accounting jobs in banks or other financial institutions, then you should be submitting a detailed resume. Such institutions verify your past working history and career achievements in minute details. Resumes for general or clerical level accounting posts should be compact. Chronological presentations can be used if you are having an extensive experience record. However, you should highlight your exceptionally remarkable achievements through your cover letter.

If you are applying for executive or managerial level accounting jobs, then you can opt for a functional type of resume with all the relevant detailing. You should take some writing assistance in such cases. There are also specialized accounting cover letter samples available for such high-esteemed posts. Referring to samples can give you a fairly good idea about the style of writing and kinds of words used. Accounting resumes usually do not contain long descriptive sentences or phrases. The employer will be looking at your achievements and experience rather than your language skills. Nevertheless, you should make use of economic jargon and financial terms rather than casual wordings and explanations. You should strictly maintain a high level of accuracy in terms of dates and record details. Also, the contents of your resume should never reflect any kind of vagueness or ambiguity.

You can get your resume written by a good writer. This is a good option because being an accountant you might not feel too confident about your writing skills but you will surely be able to judge the quality of a written resume. You can browse for good online writers. This is one of the most feasible options and the easiest way to get your work done within few days. However, you should only search among reputed service providers and discuss all the costs involved before coming to any kind of decision.


Do it Yourself – Write a Job Transfer Request



 


Much like the knowledge how to prepare a winning resume, you will at some point need to know how to draft a job transfer request. A well written job transfer request can be the key you need to open the door to a much needed transfer to a different section or for an improved and higher paying job within your current section such as management and higher. The desire is that your request might be granted, but in the case that it is not, you will have declared your interest in a new position and will be kept in mind by your employers should a new opening arise. The following steps may guide you as to how to pen an exceptional request that may better your chances of getting approved.

Instructions

Step one: Establish the rationality for your job transfer request. You may need to make a job transfer request for a number of reasons. The most general of types of transfers are made for the following reasons:

- A request for relocation 
- Requesting a transfer to a new position that has opened in your company 
- Private reasons such as location changes (for example if you have moved and are now too far away from your present job location).

Step 2: Highlight your achievements and experience.

The transfer request should Play Up your skills, accomplishments and experience. Mention any on the job training your have received, certifications, diplomas or other courses taken since you have been employed. Also include the fact that the knowledge you have gained from being a part of the company will continue to be an asset, whether it is in a better position or at another branch of the company at a different location.

Step 3: Concentrate on the contributions you will make for the business by staying with them.

Underscore how efficiently you think the company has been working, how much you appreciate the support they give employees and that fact that you wish to stay on with the company. List the positions you have held, and how they have prepared you for the position you wish to be transferred to.

Step 4: State that you are willing to give training to the one who might replace you. Be sure to include an offer to train the person who might be given your current position if your are granted the job transfer request.

Tips and Warnings:

1) Read and re-read your request, ask a friend or coworker to inspect it aboveboard for you for content as well as faults. Also be sure that the request is penned the following business format:

- Current date 
- Your name and contact info 
- The name of the contact or supervisor, their title and the full company name

Dear [Inset the name of HR Contact or Supervisor],

[Body]

To be filled out with the information listed in the steps above

[Closing]

Sincerely,

Signature

Your Name

Job title and contact info

2) Transfers can be a time consuming procedure for employers so be prepared to wait. Try to submit the request as early as possible: For example if you know you may be moving in a few weeks, submit a request for transfer as soon as plans for the move are finalized. Similarly, if you know a staff member might be resigning, submit the transfer request as soon as their leaving is made formal.

3) Be sure that you follow company policies: Give transfer request to the right person or section. Also be sure that you submit any additional paperwork that is required of you for the request. Some companies may require a separate form to be filled out in addition to your written request.


« Older Entries










Brochure Printing to advertise your business. Printing peach.







 









Archives
January 2013
December 2012
November 2012
October 2012
September 2012
August 2012
July 2012
June 2012
May 2012
April 2012
March 2012
February 2012
January 2012
December 2011
November 2011
October 2011
September 2011
August 2011
July 2011
June 2011
May 2011
April 2011
March 2011
February 2011
January 2011
 










 
 

JOB 





