





The lynda.com Story: Founders and key executives share accounts of learning, teaching, and building their company.
 Lynda 故事：创始人和主要高管分享他们关于学习、讲授和创立公司的经历。 Company cofounders Bruce Heavin and Lynda Weinman, with CEO Eric Robison and other top executives, present the early roots, current landscape, and future vision of lynda.com. This short-form documentary covers how Lynda and Bruce's careers, relationship, and company started and evolved, and how their vision and high standards have shaped the lynda.com mission to help others. 


公司联合创始人Bruce heavin和 Lynda Weinman，CEO Eric Robison 和其他高层管理者，向你们呈现Lynda早期创始根源、目前状况和未来的愿景。这个精短的记录片涵盖了Lynda和Bruce的职业、关系、公司的创立和发展，并且向我们阐述他们怎样高瞻远瞩地将Lynda的使命塑造成帮助他人。

Lynda Weinman Lynda Weinman is the cofounder and executive chair of lynda.com. A self-taught computer expert, author, educator, and entrepreneur, Lynda is an expert in web graphics and design. She has authored many best-selling books, including the very first industry book on web graphics, designing web graphics. A former faculty member at Art Center College of Design, and special effects animator and motion graphics director in the film industry, Lynda has taught at UCLA, the American Film Institute, and the San Francisco State Multimedia Studies Center, as well as consulting with and conducting workshops for Adobe, Microsoft, Hallmark, and Disney.
 
Bruce Heavin

 Bruce Heavin is the cofounder and Chief Creative Officer of lynda.com. After graduating from Art Center College of Design with a degree in illustration, he began his career as an acclaimed painter and illustrator working extensively with both traditional and electronic media, with clients that included Adobe, MSNBC, E! Entertainment Television, Outside, Computer Life, MacUser, and Keyboard magazines. Bruce is responsible for the distinctive covers of all of Lynda's web design books, which were created using acrylic paints and crayons. Bruce's work often combines computer techniques and traditional painting techniques. He has designed graphics for numerous web sites and CD-ROMs, including pieces for DreamWorks SKG Interactive's web site. Bruce authored a chapter in the After Effects Classroom in a Book publication by Adobe Press, and has used AE since the early coSA roots. He has contributed research and artwork to all of Lynda's books, and is the co-author of Coloring Web Graphics and Coloring Web Graphics.

 Eric Robison In January 2008, Eric Robison joined the lynda.com team and brought with him 25 years of operational and strategic experience working with Internet, technology, media, and consumer product companies. Eric has been actively involved with the Internet since its inception and brings a depth of creative and business expertise to the lynda.com family.

 Prior to joining lynda.com, Eric served as president of IdeaTrek, Inc., an advisory group specializing in strategic planning and management mentoring. Previous to his time at IdeaTrek, Eric spent eight years managing and advising on numerous technology and media initiatives in his position as vice president of business development and project development at Vulcan, Inc., (a company owned by Microsoft cofounder Paul Allen). While at Vulcan, Eric served as project director of the Experience Music Project and general manager of Clear Blue Sky Films.

 Eric has been playing saxophone and flute professionally for 30 years. Musical career highlights include playing in the TED Long Beach house band in 2012 under the direction of Thomas Dolby, and backing Paul McCartney, Eric Clapton, and Annie Lennox for a BBC live television concert at Buckingham Palace.

 He has produced a variety of feature and documentary projects, serving as executive producer of Far from Heaven, starring Julianne Moore and Dennis Quaid.

 Eric has extensive corporate board experience, including five public companies (three with over a $1B market cap) and over 10 private company boards. He served on the board of CNET networks for 14 years until the company was sold to CBS in 2008. 







LyndaChina.com 版权所有
有事您说话：ashyzhgj@126.com


 
















分享到...X






腾讯微博



一键通



新浪微博


QQ空间

人人网

天涯

凤凰微博

朋友网

人民微博

豆瓣网


搜狐微博

新华微博

手机

网易微博

开心网

百度空间

QQ好友



更多平台... (130)

bShare 




分

享

到
 

