
ArsTechnica
Home
Main Menu
My Stories: 24
Forums
Subscribe
Video
Log In
Search
MINISTRY OF INNOVATION / BUSINESS OF TECHNOLOGY
Google may not like it, but facial recognition is coming soon to Glass
Startup founder outlines facial recognition for Glass, calls device a "car for the mind."

by Cyrus Farivar - June 8 2013, 9:00pm
MEDIA INNOVATION PRIVACY STARTUPS
20
 
Lambda's website challenges users to upload any image from one of six celebrities and watch the API go to work. Apparently there's some Aniston in Tiger Woods.
Lambda Labs
“A major asset”

But Balaban sees potential for frequent use of Glass. He even outlined a gradual plan for how facial recognition could work.

“At first it’ll be limited to friends of friends,” he said. “It would scan your face, and let's say it knew who you were. Then it would then say, ‘What are Cyrus' preferences?’ [If you opted out] it would say 'not recognized' or 'not found.' But if it did find you, it would generate a summary of what we have in common: topics of interest, mutual friends, mutual institutions. Right now we do this signaling in an inefficient manner: t-shirts, Facebook profiles, or the e-mail address that we use. But in the future, that signaling will be more explicit. The things that you care about will be provided to you.”

This “inefficient manner” has another name, right? Talking. After all, that’s how we build relationships with each other—we talk about our interests, we converse, we build trust. That’s how interactions have happened between humans since the beginning of intelligent conversation.

Unless we’re going for a Matrix-style jack-in-data-dump of information every time we meet someone new, a pop-up display could be more obtrusive than simply talking. After all, while you (the non-Glass wearer) talk to someone with it, they’re busy scanning the screen while half-listening to what you’re saying. (And if you both have Glass, then you’ll just look ridiculous—two people glancing upward and not looking each other in the eye.)

Beyond awkward social interactions, what about an app where someone can surreptitiously take a photo of you with Glass and then use that photo to conduct further facial recognition? Google could ban it, and companies claim to be aware of the ramifications of facial recognition and associated databases. But Balaban isn't naive. He knows that “[privacy] is going to be a major asset of every company that gets in this space.”

“I'm a genuine privacy advocate,” he said. “What that means is I believe in an individual's right to control how these systems interact with them. I believe that people have the right to opt out of these databases. I believe that if somebody is using it in a way that you feel is inconsistent with how you would want a computer to recognize you and link you [to your data], and if you don't feel comfortable with that, then that's not a good thing.”

Like the 1890s

The Vermont-born developer admitted that while all this sounds nice in practice, it could become fairly difficult to control a potential sousveillance society. He cited an 1890 legal essay by attorneys Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis: “The Right to Privacy.”

In that essay, the authors write something particularly germane with respect to Google Glass:

While, for instance, the state of the photographic art was such that one's picture could seldom be taken without his consciously "sitting" for the purpose, the law of contract or of trust might afford the prudent man sufficient safeguards against the improper circulation of his portrait; but since the latest advances in photographic art have rendered it possible to take pictures surreptitiously, the doctrines of contract and of trust are inadequate to support the required protection, and the law of tort must be resorted to. The right of property in its widest sense, including all possession, including all rights and privileges, and hence embracing the right to an inviolate personality, affords alone that broad basis upon which the protection which the individual demands can be rested.
Balaban links the introduction of Google Glass and other wearable computing technology to this 19th century debut of “instantaneous photographs.”

“This is a rehashing of this cultural meme,” he said. “There’s new tech coming about and the societal and regulatory institutions lagging behind of this new tech. The new tech changes society and thus the regulatory and society institutions catch up. People will voice their very valid concerns now and the smart companies will listen to and address those concerns. Eventually a more robust legal and regulatory framework will arise that will [catch up too].”

To phrase it another way: people will just get over it.

“Every tech has its ups and downs," Balaban continued. "I think that this particular tech has really amazing upside potential to change the way humans interact, period. I think that like just like the Internet, just like computers, just like cars, there are major downsides. I am also [worried]—I have a similar stance [that you do], that I'm not sure that it's in our control. I think that humans like to think we're in control, but the reality is that there are forces that act on our world that are far greater than any one individual.”

In the face of all the potential dangers, Balaban still feels Glass, its forthcoming competitors, and wearable technology in general are “a way to change people’s lives.” He imagined examples of using it as a menu reader for blind people or as a memory aid for people with dementia—and that's to say nothing of its more mundane applications like taking pictures of your kids.

“I believe in the form factor,” he said. “Will Google Glass will be the [eventually obsolete] PDAs of wearable computing? We'll see. This is an inevitable form factor. Is Glass going to be the iPhone of wearable computing? It's got a shot. In the same way that Steve Jobs said a computer is the bicycle for the mind, this is the car for the mind.”

PAGE: 1 2
PROMOTED COMMENTS
GenericAnimeBoyArs Centurion jump to post
I can think of at least one non-creepy application of this tech: Alzheimers. While the ideal solution to Alzheimers is obviously a cure, a device like this could allow a patient with failing memory to function comfortably by augmenting their ability to remember people.
315 posts | registered Dec 18, 2006
keathArs Scholae Palatinae jump to post
Quote:
Balaban said that his interest in wearable technology was inspired by one specific occasion. He found himself at a technology company, talking to a visitor who turned out to be an executive at a well-known financial firm. (He declined to name who it was.)

“I found out later that it was somebody relatively well-known in their field,” he said. “I think that would be a fantastic experience to not only understand who you're talking to but to bring context to a conversation.


I'm sure this visitor is thinking how great it could be to be targeted by strangers all the time for the sake of their financial interests.

I foresee a time when folks will have to pay to "opt out" of these facial recognition databases, similar to having unlisted phone numbers. What a great business opportunity.
1431 posts | registered Mar 13, 2005
READER COMMENTS 20

Cyrus Farivar / Cyrus is the Senior Business Editor at Ars Technica, and is also a radio producer and author. His book, The Internet of Elsewhere, was published in April 2011.
@cfarivar
← OLDER STORYNEWER STORY →
YOU MAY ALSO LIKE

TOP FEATURE STORY

FEATURE STORY (3 PAGES)
Review: Lumia 928 is screentastic, camerarific
PureView camera does well in low light, and PenTile AMOLED looks great with WP8.
WATCH ARS VIDEO

I was struck by lightning yesterday—and boy am I sore
Ars technical director: "I, I, I... think we need to call 911."
STAY IN THE KNOW WITH
LATEST NEWS

Call connected through the NSA: Ars readers react
E-PACK YOUR BAGS

Airbus smart baggage tracks itself on plane trips

This week in Android apps: Facebook Home adds a dock and Gmail gets a new UI

Out with the old: the best Ultrabooks and convertibles from Computex
I'LL GET YOU NEXT TIME, GADGET

Passengers can challenge gov’t GPS tracking, court finds
LEAKFEST 2013, ACT THREE

Guardian publishes third secret NSA document, on cyberwar


 
SITE LINKS
About Us
Advertise with us
Contact Us
Reprints
SUBSCRIPTIONS
Subscribe to Ars
MORE READING
RSS Feeds
Newsletters
CONDE NAST SITES
Reddit
Wired
Vanity Fair
Style
Details


VIEW MOBILE SITE
© 2013 Condé Nast. All rights reserved
Use of this Site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement (effective 3/21/12) and Privacy Policy (effective 3/21/12), and Ars Technica Addendum (effective 5/17/2012)
Your California Privacy Rights
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.

Ad Choices
