
Skip to search.
New User? Register
Sign In
Help
Get new Yahoo! Mail apps
 
 
Mail
My Y!
Yahoo!
Yahoo! Answers
 	Search Web

HOME BROWSE CATEGORIES
MY ACTIVITY
ABOUT
Ask
What would you like to ask?  Continue
Answer
Discover
What are you looking for?   Search Y! Answers Advanced Search
Home > All Categories > Politics & Government > Law Enforcement & Police > Resolved Question
 
Ozeki
Resolved QuestionShow me another »
Why is it so difficult to impose gun control in USA? Especially on assault weapons.?
The current Congress member, Democrats, even under the new Obama administration has blocked an attempt to ban assault weapons.

Haven't people learned from the shooting incidents?
4 years ago Report Abuse
Additional Details
The main purpose of a gun is to kill. 

Be it for hunting, be it for self-defense. It is there to kill.

How many percentage, guns in USA are being used to kill than just to deter or hunting purposes?

Which part of the word 'kill by guns' that americans love so much ?
4 years ago

 
Soda Pop
Best Answer - Chosen by Voters

the main reason why there was not a ban on "assault weapons" is because assault weapons fall under many categories. the left wing media says its a gun that looks like a military rifle so it must be more dangerous than a regular semi auto gun (fires once every single time you pull the trigger) although the only difference is the outside shell look of the gun. automatic weapons are already restricted from a very big majority of civilians and you need very extensive background checks just to get a license to own one. and not all guns are intended to kill people or animals. some are collected, some are just used for target practicing and having a good time out at the range. and even if they are used to kill animals, it is for good reason. animals need to have population control (conservation) and almost ALL of the wildlife biologists agree with that and they agree that hunting is the most effective method of conserving animals so they have a healthy habitat and can live good healthy lives. 
and it isn't like a criminal can go to your legal gun selling gun shop and buy a gun off the bat. background checks are needed, and in more restrictive states certain licenses and waiting periods are needed (states where that is used is CA,NY,NJ) but you see a criminal does not just buy a gun like an average person would buy a pizza. because what makes criminals be criminals is that they don't follow the law. so if you restrict ways to get the gun legally for law abiding citizens, it does not help in any way. yes background checks are needed, but banning is not. because if you ban guns of any type, all of the law abiding citizens will turn them in. not the criminals. i dont think a criminal is going to go up to a police station and turn in his illegally obtained gun, becuase he will get arrested. it will just make it easier for him to do school shootings and armed robberies and all related crimes. becuase the law abiding citizen will have nothing to fight back with.
I have about 9 guns in my house. all legally bought and legally obtained. the only things that have been killed with any of them are deer, elk, and the occaisonal coyote. i do not intend to kill any human, unless for personal defense or if someone i love is in danger. 
i really hope i helped you realize that guns aren't just for unjust killing. thank you.
4 years ago Report Abuse
29% 2 Votes
2 people rated this as good
stars - mark this as Interesting!

Email
Comment (0)
Save
Other Answers (11)
Show:   
 
.45 Peacemaker
28,000 gun laws not enough for you? No assault weapons were banned during the last AWB because an assault rifle is capable of full-auto fire and falls under the NFA of 1934. The semi-auto versions were still available for purchase, they just were more expensive. When the AWB went away in 2004 the streets didn't run with blood like we were warned of. 

My dad was murdered by someone wielding a vehicle with an automatic transmition are you willing to drive a standard transmition vehicle because there are more deaths caused by people using vehicle than with people using firearms? I doubt it. Do you realize that the technology is over one hundred years old, predating automatic transmition vehicles...so we are supposed to use lesser technology? That's not the American way and sure isn't progressive to do so.
4 years ago Report Abuse
0% 0 Votes
2 people rated this as good
 
CAL
How do you define "assault weapons"? They are simply semi automatic guns that look kind of "military". True military assault weapons are capable of full automatic fire and these are already illegal. I do think that a common sense change to gun laws would be to prohibit large, removable magazines. These are what allow a criminal to hose down a place and reload quickly. There is no reason to have a 10, 20 or 30 round magazine for hunting or home defense.
4 years ago Report Abuse
0% 0 Votes
2 people rated this as good
 
TechnoRa...
You ask why is it difficult to pass gun control? The simple answer is that Congress isn't stupid enough. Congress isn't going to passed a new ban on 'assault weapons' because they don't want to be voted out of office. Personally I'm rather disappointed. I'd like to see Congress pass a ban on firearms so that Republicans can take control of both House and Senate in 2010.

Anything this Congress does, history has shown, can be undone by the next Congress, except when it comes to the Supreme Court. Supreme Court Justices are appointed for life. What America should fear is a shifting in the Supreme Court towards the freedom hating left. If Congress is really smart, they will not confirm any anti gun Supreme Court nominee.
4 years ago Report Abuse
14% 1 Vote
2 people rated this as good
 
Liberty for All
First, there is no such thing as an "assault weapon". It was a term created by the Clintons to intimidate people because it sounds dangerous. The "assault weapons" that you want to ban are nothing more than semi-automatic hunting rifles.

Let's turn this around. My friends, relatives, neighbors have all owned guns and hunted with them our entire lives (I'm almost 50, so we're talking a lot of years). None of us has ever commited a crime with those guns. Furthermore, none of our guns has ever been out of our possession and used in a crime.

So, my question to you is, why punish law abiding citizens who enjoy hunting and the sport of shooting rather than punish the criminals who use guns for wrongful purposes?

Cars kill many more people each year than firearms, yet we don't hear a cry to ban cars. Why is that?
4 years ago Report Abuse
14% 1 Vote
2 people rated this as good
 
Reagan II
Because we the people of the united States believe in freedom and we have the right to bear arms and protect ourselves. look at every country that has more gun control and you'll notice higher crime rates, more violent crimes, and people that are less safe because their government stripped them of their right to defend themselves. guns in the right hands save lives that is a fact and they prevent more violent incidents than they "cause". but of course, your own views have history. gun control worked wonders for hitler, stalin, castro. 

according to your logic, should we therefore ban all knives, clubs, anything that can be used as a weapon. i know you probably use a knife every day, how many people have you killed with that?
4 years ago Report Abuse
0% 0 Votes
4 people rated this as good
 
whip
we don't need any more gun control.we have guns to protect us from the government.
Source(s):
every one of the mass murderers from columbine up were all on anti depressants.think their may be a connection?since the rise of their widely popular use in the early eighties.this has become common place.and so has mass murder with everyone who was on it!
4 years ago Report Abuse
0% 0 Votes
7 people rated this as good
 
orangedo...
Watch "Bowling for Columbine." We are a fear driven society. Guns are a part of the American culture. They (We) will never be without guns... this I am sure of.

You can educate people about guns. There are many misunderstandings about guns. 

Just remember, guns don't kill people... people kill people.
4 years ago Report Abuse
0% 0 Votes
3 people rated this as good
 
illitrt
If you have to ask, you'll never get it. Good thing you live in a nanny state.
4 years ago Report Abuse
14% 1 Vote
 
Colonel Cluster-****
Whip is correct. People will just find other means to exact violence upon others.
4 years ago Report Abuse
0% 0 Votes
6 people rated this as good
  by Amarkov Answer hidden due to its low rating Show
  by Louis Riel Answer hidden due to its low rating Show
Discover Questions in Law Enforcement & Police

Is Provincialpardons.com a good agency to apply for help to remove my criminal records in Canada?
Do tazers even do anything to people?
How much prove do you need to send someone to jail for theft?
Are cops required to carry guns?
Ready to Participate?
Get Started!

Related Questions

Would a gun be legal in california if it had all of the…
How come Ted Nugent can brandish assault weapons on stage and…
How long will the jail sentence be for assault with a deadly…
Assault with a weapon?	How many years in prison? Is there…
What should be the future of gun control laws in America?
Categories

All Categories
Politics & Government
Civic Participation
Elections
Embassies & Consulates
Government
Immigration
International Organizations
Law & Ethics
Law Enforcement & Police
Military
Other - Politics & Government
Politics
Answers International

ArgentinaAustraliaBrazilCanadaChinaFranceGermanyHong KongIndiaIndonesiaItalyJapanMalaysiaMexicoNew ZealandPhilippinesQuebecSingaporeSouth KoreaSpainTaiwanThailandUnited KingdomUnited StatesVietnamen Español
Yahoo! does not evaluate or guarantee the accuracy of any Yahoo! Answers content. Click here for the Full Disclaimer.

Help us improve Yahoo! Answers. Send Feedback

Copyright © 2013 Yahoo! Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Copyright/IP Policy - Privacy Policy - About Our Ads - Terms of Service - Community Guidelines - Safety Tips
