Register | Login 
  
 Home
Technical Article
Discussion Zone
MyCalendar
Download
Application
Today's Question: 	
Will Blink dominate the future browser market?
Description My Answer
Technical Articles => Java =>  Java
Seven Java projects that changed the world


Source : Edd Dumbill    Date : 2011-07-26 02:50:42  
O\'Reilly is celebrating the release of Java 7, and our inaugural OSCON Java conference: July 25-27 in Portland, Ore.
Java\'s open source ecosystem is strong and healthy, one of the primary reasons for our creation of OSCON Java. Over the last decade, several projects have traveled beyond mere adoption and had effects dominating the Java world, into software development in general, and some even further into the daily lives of users.
JUnit

Ported to Java by Kent Beck and Erich Gamma from Beck\'s work in unit testing in Smalltalk, JUnit has been largely responsible for popularizing test-driven development over the last decade. Many implementations have been created, in .NET, C, Python, Perl and just about every language in popular use.

Eclipse

As Java and its APIs matured in the early 2000s, the Eclipse IDE provided a way for programmers to be productive and negotiate the growing Java ecosystem. Eclipse was also the first major project to use the SWT UI toolkit, providing important competition to Sun\'s Swing and showing that Java programs can provide a rich native interface. Eclipse has evolved toward a goal of being a universal IDE, and it now provides a rich foundation for platform vendors to integrate with.

Spring

The Spring Framework has played an important role in enabling Java developers to be productive, managing a balance between simplicity and features. Spring gives Java developers a set of services providing commonly used application functionality such as data access and transaction management. As a competitor to Sun\'s Enterprise Java Beans system, Spring enabled an alternative and simpler path for Java applications, as well as ensuring a healthy competition of ideas in the way Java applications are constructed.

Solr

The Solr server, and the Lucene search engine it encapsulates, has been for many years a simple and practical solution to providing search capabilities to web and enterprise applications. Solr\'s genius is in providing HTTP access to the powerful and fast Lucene search library, enabling it to become a part of any system, regardless of whether it is implemented in Java or not. More than any other project, Solr has ensured that good search is a checkbox item for modern web applications.

Hudson and Jenkins

Originally developed as Hudson, and now also as Jenkins, this continuous integration tool is a key part of a Java development setup. Jenkins provides automated build and testing of a software project, continuing in the footsteps of JUnit in enabling agile development on the Java platform. While both Hudson and Jenkins persist for now as forks of each other, it doesn\'t detract from the work of Kohsuke Kawaguchi in creating a world-class continuous integration platform and so enhancing the quality of much Java development.

Hadoop

This Java implementation of the famous MapReduce model is the powerhouse that has enabled most \"big data\" systems. By lowering the cost of extracting value from large data sets, Hadoop has made practical the personalization and advertising businesses of Facebook and Yahoo, and many other companies. In the same way that Linux enabled large websites to be built on cheap hardware, Hadoop enables large-scale distributed computing by handling failure at the software level. Both Hadoop and the above-mentioned Lucene are the product of the work of Doug Cutting.

Android

Controversy is never that far from Java, whether the custodian be Sun or Oracle. Google\'s choice to use Java as the programming language for its massively popular Android mobile operating system has led to a renewed interest in the language from whole new communities of software developers. Android programs undergo a further step to convert JVM bytecode to Dalvik bytecode — Dalvik being a virtual machine optimized for mobile devices. Google has been able to leverage Eclipse to provide software developers with a mature development environment for creating Android applications.

Oracle and Google are currently engaged in a lawsuit over a claim that Android infringes on multiple patents held by Oracle. The results of that suit notwithstanding, Android has done much to recruit developers and perpetuate the use of Java in client-side software development.

Source : http://radar.oreilly.com/2011/07/7-java-projects.html
Save as PDF Mark as read Mark as important  

Tags:Java,Projects,Prominent,Eclipse,Sue   Read(1109) Comment(0)

       	           
 Previous : Why there is white/blank space instead of AdSense ad on my website? 
 Next : The future of IT will be reduced to three kinds of jobs

  ::Related Articles
 How many Java programmers are there in the world?
 Top 10 essential Java classes
 Code reviews in the 21st Century
 Why I Still Use Emacs
 30 minutes to fix Java vulnerability
 IBM Launches Maqetta HTML5 Tool as Open-Source
 C++ 11 Memory Management
 Bill Gates to return as Microsoft's white knight?
 Regex vs IndexOf in Java.
 A Month With Scala
  ::Comment List
No comment for this article.

  ::Comment
Nickname 	 
Email 	
Comment	
  

 
Recent articles
10 tools to make your shell script more powerful
Are you ready for Facebook's phone?
Google will launch new rendering engine Blink
How does Class box get 1 million users with only 4 people?
Understand this in JavaScript
JavaScript efficiency catch up
FTP active mode and passive mode
E-commerce "Whampoa Military Academy" in Guangdong
Big Corporate Layoffs Hit Shenzhen IT Manufacturing Business
Lenovo gets into the chip design field
more>>
Most read
TIOBE : C overtakes Java as the No.1 programming language
Which programming language should I learn first?
Disposable Email address
Sony is to release PlayStation4 in 2015
Hacking Vs. Programming
Never ever touch a programmer
TIOBE : Where is that next big programming language?
Multitasking vs multiprogramming
Google is developing advanced programming technology to simplify Web application development
Eight C++ programming mistakes the compiler won’t catch
more>>
Most commented
Hacking Vs. Programming
Which programming language should I learn first?
Error handling style in C
10 controversial programming opinions?
C vs Java Complete Comparison
Google+ is sick
Unix Philosophy
Disposable Email address
Will Google+ be a "Ghost City"
Frequently used explanations of programmers
more>>

About us | Contact us | Advertisements | FAQ | Privacy policy | Terms of service | Bug report
© 2013 Pixelstech.net All rights reserved

You can read our articles actively now. Try to right click the mouse on the article content area and see what will happen.

Do not show again

