















































Solutions
Products






























Download
Support


Partners
Press
About Luxand





 
























Solutions
 > 
About Luxand, Inc.
 


















About Luxand, Inc.



 









Luxand, Inc. is a private hi-tech company formed in 2005. Luxand research activities began with Artificial Intelligence and biometric identification technologies, allowing the company to develop a complete set of tools and libraries to perform fully automatic recognition of human faces and facial features. Today, the company provides a broad range of facial feature recognition solutions. The company’s products and technologies are used by biometric identification and security companies, banks, the entertainment industry, medical and cosmetic industry, at online entertainment portals, chat rooms, and movie Web sites around the globe. Police organizations and the military are using Luxand technologies to identify people and locate personal records by facial photographs. Government, municipal and commercial entities are employing our products in their document workflow for automating the process of entering facial pictures in a database. Universities and research facilities are using our tools and technologies to conduct scientific researches.

Luxand, Inc. has its own research and development lab. Scientists, researchers and developers working in the research lab design next-generation technologies that can not only recognize faces and facial features, but automatically build highly realistic 3D models. With the help of these models, one can animate and transform faces as demonstrated in popular projects such as: PhotoSmileys.com, MakeMeBabies.com, In20Years.com, PicTreat.com, MakeMeZombie.com, as well as a number of projects for the mobile entertainment industry. Many technologies developed by Luxand are patented or patent pending.

With our powerful technologies, flexible conditions and affordable prices, we are proud to work with many well-known companies. Our customers include Universal Pictures, Samsung, LG, Citrix, NEC Asia Pacific, Diebold, Unilever, Ford, Danone, U.S. Department of Defence Cyber Crime Center, Florida Department of Corrections, Singapore Ministry of Home Affairs, Banco Azteca (Mexico), Kyoto Institute of Technology, Korea National Forensic Service, and Comando Generale dell'Arma dei Сarabinieri (Italy).

Our products are available worldwide via a broad distribution network. You can find a local partner here: http://luxand.com/partners. 

Please feel free to contact us if you have any questions or suggestions. Our email address is info@luxand.com.
 



Top Downloads


Blink! Pro
Log in to your PC by simply looking at it.

BabyMaker
Don't wait nine months to see your baby! All you need is two pictures.

ProphecyMaster
What Will You Look Like in 20 Years? 

Glamourizer
Turn ordinary photos into glamour portraits, hundreds at a time.



Latest News




30.01.2013Luxand Develops 3D Avatar Modeling Technology
 The new avatar technology can automatically turn any facial photo into a convincing animated 3D model, expressing a wide range of emotions. 

05.09.2012Luxand Makes iPhone Users Laugh
 Luxand announces the release of PhotoSmileys, an iPhone app to create animated smileys out of a single picture of a human face. 

08.02.2012Blink! Pro Learns to Hide
 Blink! Pro Learns to Hide! The newest update allows you to hide Blink! Pro for greater security. 


















Solutions  |  Products  |  Download  |  Privacy  |  Support  |  Development  |  Press  |  About Luxand







© 2005-2013 Luxand, Inc.




 
























