















































Solutions
Products






























Download
Support


Partners
Press
About Luxand





 
























Solutions
 > 
End-User Products
 


















End-User Products



 












  




Glamourizer: Turn ordinary snapshots into stunning glamour portraits in one click!

 Glamourizer makes it easy to create perfect glamour portraits out of ordinary snapshots. Automatically locating all the people faces in a picture, Glamourizer makes skin look smooth and natural while removing small imperfections. Automatic skin tone adjustments and red-eye removal make batch image enhancement a matter of just a few mouse clicks! Read More... 


  




Luxand Automates Windows Logon with Blink!

Blink! Pro lets users log in to Windows by simply looking into a webcam. Just as fingerprint readers verify users by scanning a fingertip, Blink! Pro does the same – but without having them touch anything. In addition, Blink! Pro offers the ability to continuously monitor whether the registered user or anybody at all is present in front of a PC, locking access if nobody is there for a defined period of time. Read More... 


  




Luxand Blink! - Log in to your PC by simply looking!

Luxand Blink! allows users to log in to Windows by simply looking into a webcam – no need to scan fingers or type lengthy passwords. Luxand Blink! supports all types of webcams, accommodates for varying lighting conditions, and recognizes faces with different haircuts, contacts, lipsticks, and fashion accessories. Read More... 


  




FaceSwapper: Swap faces between images automatically!

FaceSwapper makes it easy to cut and paste faces from one picture into another without precision selections or manual color adjustments. The cutting and pasting occurs in 3D space, allowing you to easily match the angle and direction of the target face. No need to use complicated 3D modeling applications or costly graphical packages. Create high-quality collages in minutes! Read More... 


  




BabyMaker: Don't wait for nine months to see your baby!

The science of fortune telling is brought to perfection with BabyMaker. Just put pictures of you two into BabyMaker, and see what your baby will look like in just a moment. Impress your friends and family with 'what if' pictures of your possible babies made with just about anyone. Read More... 


  




ProphecyMaster: Have a peek into the future!

No need to wait for 20 years to see what you or your friends are going to look like! A single photo is all you need to peek into the future. Just put your picture into ProphecyMaster, and see your face aged instantly. Read More... 


  




FaceMorpher: Create funny face animations. Morph them ALL!

Create animated transitions of one face into another in just minutes with this fully automated face morphing program. It guesses basic spots automatically and makes realistic animations saving you time and effort. Read More... 


  




Chord Pickout: A program to recognize chords in a song

Chord Pickout uses its artificial intelligence to guess chords for you. All you have to do is to load a media file (wav or mp3) and click a button. Chord Pickout will transcribe the music and write down the recognized chords automatically. Read More... 







Top Downloads


Blink! Pro
Log in to your PC by simply looking at it.

BabyMaker
Don't wait nine months to see your baby! All you need is two pictures.

ProphecyMaster
What Will You Look Like in 20 Years? 

Glamourizer
Turn ordinary photos into glamour portraits, hundreds at a time.



Latest News




30.01.2013Luxand Develops 3D Avatar Modeling Technology
 The new avatar technology can automatically turn any facial photo into a convincing animated 3D model, expressing a wide range of emotions. 

05.09.2012Luxand Makes iPhone Users Laugh
 Luxand announces the release of PhotoSmileys, an iPhone app to create animated smileys out of a single picture of a human face. 

08.02.2012Blink! Pro Learns to Hide
 Blink! Pro Learns to Hide! The newest update allows you to hide Blink! Pro for greater security. 


















Solutions  |  Products  |  Download  |  Privacy  |  Support  |  Development  |  Press  |  About Luxand







© 2005-2013 Luxand, Inc.




 
























