


















eBay Careers Privacy Policy

Help


























This Policy was last updated on 20-DEC-2006.
 
This Privacy Policy describes how eBay Inc., its subsidiaries, affiliates, and joint ventures (collectively referred to as the “Company” or “we”) handle your personal information collected via this Site.
 
Personal information you submit through our Site will be collected and stored on servers in the United States, and may be shared with our affiliated legal entities around the world. This Privacy Policy is governed by United States law. The laws regarding personal information in the United States and abroad may be less stringent than the laws of the country in which you reside; however, we will store, process, and transmit your personal information in a safe, confidential, and secure manner using industry standard practices.
 
By using this Site, you expressly consent to our collection, storage, use, transfer, and disclosure of your personal information, including any sensitive information you elect to submit, as described in this Privacy Policy. By providing personal information to this Site, you expressly consent to the terms of this Privacy Policy.

Collection
 You may browse the site without providing any personal information. However, to submit an application, you will be required to submit your personal information otherwise you may not be able to access certain parts of the site and we may not be able to process your application.

We may collect and store the following types personal information:
 •email address, other contact information 
•resume or CV, cover letter, previous work experience, education, transcript 
•desired salary, relevant work experience, type of employment sought, date available, employee referral
 •eBay, PayPal, or Skype user ID 
•standard weblog information including IP address. 

Any additional information you choose to provide to the Company via this Site will be used in accordance with this Privacy Policy. If we intend to use your personal information in any way incompatible with this Privacy Policy, we will provide you with notice and request your consent. Further, we will ask for your consent to obtain additional information from third party agencies, and notify you of the information received from these third parties where required by applicable law.

Use
 Your application and any additional personal information you provide will be used to assess your skills and interest in career opportunities at the Company and for reporting purposes as required by law. We may verify your information, conduct background checks, and contact you about a career opportunity. If you accept employment with the Company, the information collected on this Site will become part of your employment record and will be used for employment purposes.

Disclosure
 The Company will not sell or rent your personal information to third parties for their marketing purpose without your explicit consent. We may share your personal information with service providers or consultants acting on our behalf and they will be obligated to protect your personal information consistently with the terms of this Privacy Policy. Access to your personal information will be limited to those employees or agents of the Company who have a business need to access such personal information and may include recruiters, human resources personnel, and managers or their designees.
 
We may also disclose your personal information in order to: (1) protect the legal rights, privacy or safety the Company or its employees, agents and contractors; (2) protect the safety and security of visitors to our web sites or other properties; (3) protect against fraud or other illegal activity or for risk management purposes; (4) respond to inquiries or requests from public authorities; (5) permit us to pursue available remedies or limit the damages that we may sustain; (6) enforce our Terms of Service; or (7) comply with the law or legal process.

Data Retention
 We are required to retain information of candidates applying for jobs within the United States. Personal information of candidates applying for jobs in other parts of the world will be retained in accordance with local law.
 
We may delete your personal information at any time (including your CV/resume), without any reason. Therefore, please retain your own copy of the personal information provided to us.

Cookies
 We use cookies (small files placed on your hard drive) and other technologies to help analyze our web page flow, customize our services, and enhance your experience on our site. You may delete or reject cookies at any time; however, doing so may limit the use of some features of the site.

Access
 You can access, review, and change most of your personal information by logging into the Site. Generally, we will not manually modify your personal information because it is very difficult to verify your identity remotely. You must promptly update your personal information if it changes or is inaccurate. Upon your request, we will deactivate or remove your personal information from our active databases, although some information may be retained as permitted or required by law.
 
You are responsible for actions taken with your account and password and therefore please take care to secure both. If you feel your account has been compromised please contact us at staffing_system_support@ebay.com.

Security
 We treat information as an asset that must be protected and use tools (encryption, passwords, physical security) to protect your personal information against unauthorized access, use and disclosure. However, as you probably know, third parties may unlawfully intercept or access transmissions or private communications. Therefore, although we work very hard to protect your privacy, we do not promise, and you should not expect, that your personal information or private communications will always remain private.

General
 We may change this Privacy Policy from time to time to accurately reflect our information collection and disclosure practices, changes in industry practice or changes in the law. All changes to this Privacy Policy are effective thirty (30) days after they are initially posted on this Site or when you register. If you do not agree to the changes, please contact us to deactivate your account. You can always tell when we have last updated the Privacy Policy by checking in the “Last Updated” line at the beginning of this Privacy Policy.
 
If your questions are not answered online, you may write to us at: eBay Inc. Attn: Legal - Global Privacy Practices, 2145 Hamilton Avenue, San Jose, California 95125, USA.
 
By clicking the “AGREE” button, I agree to the collection, use, transfer and disclosure of my personal information as detailed in this Privacy Policy.
 









