















































Solutions
Products






























Download
Support


Partners
Press
About Luxand





 
























Solutions
 > 
Mirror Reality
 















Mirror Reality



Mirror Reality is a brand-new product line based on Luxand’s latest development in real-time face recognition and morphing. Think of it as a digital mirror. You look at a webcam and see yourself transformed on the monitor as you watch.




Mirror Reality: Aging


 Aging is the first product from the new range. With Mirror Reality: Aging, you will see your face age in real time . It’s like looking in a magic mirror! You see your reflection repeating your every move, only the reflection is ten, twenty, or thirty years older than you are. 

Flexible Customization

You can adjust Mirror Reality: Aging in a variety of ways, making it a perfect match for retailers, the entertainment industry, advertising, and PR agencies. The quality and type of aging can be changed, and of course, you can specify the exact amount of aging. You can even have several mirrors picture-in-picture style! One could show normal aging while the others demonstrate the effects of smoking, using drugs, or consuming alcohol. Mirror Reality: Aging can be a powerful propaganda tool.

You can, of course, use Mirror Reality: Aging in exactly the opposite way. If you’re selling an anti-wrinkle solution, you could adjust Mirror Reality: Aging to display ‘normal’ aging as opposed to aging with the product you sell. This allows Mirror Reality: Aging to become your perfect advertising tool.




 



Top Downloads


Blink! Pro
Log in to your PC by simply looking at it.

BabyMaker
Don't wait nine months to see your baby! All you need is two pictures.

ProphecyMaster
What Will You Look Like in 20 Years? 

Glamourizer
Turn ordinary photos into glamour portraits, hundreds at a time.



Latest News




30.01.2013Luxand Develops 3D Avatar Modeling Technology
 The new avatar technology can automatically turn any facial photo into a convincing animated 3D model, expressing a wide range of emotions. 

05.09.2012Luxand Makes iPhone Users Laugh
 Luxand announces the release of PhotoSmileys, an iPhone app to create animated smileys out of a single picture of a human face. 

08.02.2012Blink! Pro Learns to Hide
 Blink! Pro Learns to Hide! The newest update allows you to hide Blink! Pro for greater security. 


















Solutions  |  Products  |  Download  |  Privacy  |  Support  |  Development  |  Press  |  About Luxand







© 2005-2013 Luxand, Inc.




 
























