















































Solutions
Products






























Download
Support


Partners
Press
About Luxand





 
























Solutions
 > 
Products
 


















Products



 








Luxand, Inc. has created a number of products for face recognition, animation, music recognition, and image and sound processing and analysis.
 










Luxand FaceSDK 













Detect human faces and recognize facial features in your applications with Luxand FaceSDK. Facial feature recognition allows the automation of common post-processing tasks such as red-eye removal and skin tone adjustment. Create graphical editors or dedicated automatic red-eye removal products or develop custom solutions for making a 3D head model with a single facial photograph. Morph, animate, or transform human faces with Luxand FaceSDK. 

Read more...
 

FaceCrop SDK offers developers single-call access to fully automated detection, cropping, resizing, and exporting images of human faces. No matter what size, format, or resolution the source picture is, and how large or small is the face in it, FaceCrop SDK will automatically locate and cut the face, saving the target picture in just the size and format you need.
 
Read more...
 









FaceMorpher – End-User Version 













Create animated transitions of one face into another in just minutes with this fully automated face morphing program. It guesses basic spots automatically and makes realistic animations saving you time and effort.
 
Read More... 










Chord Pickout: A Program to Recognize Chords in a Song 













Chord Pickout uses its artificial intelligence to guess chords for you. All you have to do is to load a media file (wav or mp3) and click a button. Chord Pickout will transcribe the music and write down the recognized chords automatically.
 
Read More... 




Top Downloads


Blink! Pro
Log in to your PC by simply looking at it.

BabyMaker
Don't wait nine months to see your baby! All you need is two pictures.

ProphecyMaster
What Will You Look Like in 20 Years? 

Glamourizer
Turn ordinary photos into glamour portraits, hundreds at a time.



Latest News




30.01.2013Luxand Develops 3D Avatar Modeling Technology
 The new avatar technology can automatically turn any facial photo into a convincing animated 3D model, expressing a wide range of emotions. 

05.09.2012Luxand Makes iPhone Users Laugh
 Luxand announces the release of PhotoSmileys, an iPhone app to create animated smileys out of a single picture of a human face. 

08.02.2012Blink! Pro Learns to Hide
 Blink! Pro Learns to Hide! The newest update allows you to hide Blink! Pro for greater security. 


















Solutions  |  Products  |  Download  |  Privacy  |  Support  |  Development  |  Press  |  About Luxand







© 2005-2013 Luxand, Inc.




 
























