















































Solutions
Products






























Download
Support


Partners
Press
About Luxand





 
























Solutions
 > 
API
 












Luxand Face Recognition API


Avatar API
 Transform users' faces into 3D animated avatars that can smile, cry, or laugh! The API allows to simply upload a single photo and immediately get a custom avatar. The technology creates high-quality avatars, which feature an unprecedented degree of realism.

Baby Prediction API
 Predict the future of your users by creating a photo of their potential child! By analyzing two given faces, Baby Prediction API can produce a picture of a baby that has a little bit of both.

Face Aging API
 Let your users discover how their faces might look as they age! Just upload a picture of a face, and Face Aging API will show what it will look like twenty or thirty years from now.
 
Zombie API
 What would your visitors look like if they were zombies? Modern high tech brings the answer! Upload a clear picture of a face, and Zombie API will automatically process the image, turning it into a spooky green creature.
 
Face Enhancement API
 Enhance your users' photos by reducing imperfections and improving skin tone in one click! The API will make the skin look smooth and healthy, removing any blemishes or imperfections, correcting red eyes and artificial color casts. 




Top Downloads


Blink! Pro
Log in to your PC by simply looking at it.

BabyMaker
Don't wait nine months to see your baby! All you need is two pictures.

ProphecyMaster
What Will You Look Like in 20 Years? 

Glamourizer
Turn ordinary photos into glamour portraits, hundreds at a time.



Latest News




30.01.2013Luxand Develops 3D Avatar Modeling Technology
 The new avatar technology can automatically turn any facial photo into a convincing animated 3D model, expressing a wide range of emotions. 

05.09.2012Luxand Makes iPhone Users Laugh
 Luxand announces the release of PhotoSmileys, an iPhone app to create animated smileys out of a single picture of a human face. 

08.02.2012Blink! Pro Learns to Hide
 Blink! Pro Learns to Hide! The newest update allows you to hide Blink! Pro for greater security. 


















Solutions  |  Products  |  Download  |  Privacy  |  Support  |  Development  |  Press  |  About Luxand







© 2005-2013 Luxand, Inc.




 
























