分享
应用程序
公共主页
人人生活
人人小组
同名同姓
校园百科
大学百科
人人热点
人人小站
人人逛街
人人校招
人人高考


注册
登录
帮助
给我们提建议
更多
分享
热门日志
Cities and Ambition
分享
Cities and Ambition

来源： 滕之飞的日志

 		 



May 2008

Great cities attract ambitious people. You can sense it when youwalk around one. In a hundred subtle ways, the city sends you amessage: you could do more; you should try harder.

The surprising thing is how different these messages can be. NewYork tells you, above all: you should make more money. There areother messages too, of course. You should be hipper. You shouldbe better looking. But the clearest message is that you should bericher.

What I like about Boston (or rather Cambridge) is that the messagethere is: you should be smarter. You really should get around toreading all those books you've been meaning to.

When you ask what message a city sends, you sometimes get surprisinganswers. As much as they respect brains in Silicon Valley, themessage the Valley sends is: you should be more powerful.

That's not quite the same message New York sends. Power mattersin New York too of course, but New York is pretty impressed by abillion dollars even if you merely inherited it. In Silicon Valleyno one would care except a few real estate agents. What mattersin Silicon Valley is how much effect you have on the world. Thereason people there care about Larry and Sergey is not their wealthbut the fact that they control Google, which affects practicallyeveryone.

_____


How much does it matter what message a city sends? Empirically,the answer seems to be: a lot. You might think that if you hadenough strength of mind to do great things, you'd be able to transcendyour environment. Where you live should make at most a couplepercent difference. But if you look at the historical evidence,it seems to matter more than that. Most people who did great thingswere clumped together in a few places where that sort of thing wasdone at the time.

You can see how powerful cities are from something I wrote aboutearlier: the case of the Milanese Leonardo. Practically everyfifteenth century Italian painter you've heard of was from Florence,even though Milan was just as big. People in Florence weren'tgenetically different, so you have to assume there was someone bornin Milan with as much natural ability as Leonardo. What happenedto him?

If even someone with the same natural ability as Leonardocouldn't beat the force of environment, do you suppose you can?

I don't. I'm fairly stubborn, but I wouldn't try to fight thisforce. I'd rather use it. So I've thought a lot about where tolive.

I'd always imagined Berkeley would be the ideal place—thatit would basically be Cambridge with good weather. But when Ifinally tried living there a couple years ago, it turned out notto be. The message Berkeley sends is: you should live better. Lifein Berkeley is very civilized. It's probably the place in Americawhere someone from Northern Europe would feel most at home. Butit's not humming with ambition.

In retrospect it shouldn't have been surprising that a place sopleasant would attract people interested above all in quality oflife. Cambridge with good weather, it turns out, is not Cambridge.The people you find in Cambridge are not there by accident. Youhave to make sacrifices to live there. It's expensive and somewhatgrubby, and the weather's often bad. So the kind of people youfind in Cambridge are the kind of people who want to live where thesmartest people are, even if that means living in an expensive,grubby place with bad weather.

As of this writing, Cambridge seems to be the intellectual capitalof the world. I realize that seems a preposterous claim. Whatmakes it true is that it's more preposterous to claim about anywhereelse. American universities currently seem to be the best, judgingfrom the flow of ambitious students. And what US city has a strongerclaim? New York? A fair number of smart people, but diluted by amuch larger number of neanderthals in suits. The Bay Area has alot of smart people too, but again, diluted; there are two greatuniversities, but they're far apart. Harvard and MIT are practicallyadjacent by West Coast standards, and they're surrounded by about20 other colleges and universities.[1] 

Cambridge as a result feels like a town whose main industry isideas, while New York's is finance and Silicon Valley's is startups.

_____


When you talk about cities in the sense we are, what you're reallytalking about is collections of people. For a long time citieswere the only large collections of people, so you could use the twoideas interchangeably. But we can see how much things are changingfrom the examples I've mentioned. New York is a classic great city.But Cambridge is just part of a city, and Silicon Valley is noteven that. (San Jose is not, as it sometimes claims, the capitalof Silicon Valley. It's just 178 square miles at one end of it.)

Maybe the Internet will change things further. Maybe one day themost important community you belong to will be a virtual one, andit won't matter where you live physically. But I wouldn't bet onit. The physical world is very high bandwidth, and some of theways cities send you messages are quite subtle.

One of the exhilarating things about coming back to Cambridge everyspring is walking through the streets at dusk, when you can seeinto the houses. When you walk through Palo Alto in the evening,you see nothing but the blue glow of TVs. In Cambridge you seeshelves full of promising-looking books. Palo Alto was probablymuch like Cambridge in 1960, but you'd never guess now that therewas a university nearby. Now it's just one of the richer neighborhoodsin Silicon Valley. [2] 

A city speaks to you mostly by accident—in things you seethrough windows, in conversations you overhear. It's not somethingyou have to seek out, but something you can't turn off. One of theoccupational hazards of living in Cambridge is overhearing theconversations of people who use interrogative intonation in declarativesentences. But on average I'll take Cambridge conversations overNew York or Silicon Valley ones.

A friend who moved to Silicon Valley in the late 90s said the worstthing about living there was the low quality of the eavesdropping.At the time I thought she was being deliberately eccentric. Sure,it can be interesting to eavesdrop on people, but is good qualityeavesdropping so important that it would affect where you chose tolive? Now I understand what she meant. The conversations youoverhear tell you what sort of people you're among.

_____


No matter how determined you are, it's hard not to be influencedby the people around you. It's not so much that you do whatever acity expects of you, but that you get discouraged when no one aroundyou cares about the same things you do.

There's an imbalance between encouragement and discouragement likethat between gaining and losing money. Most people overvaluenegative amounts of money: they'll work much harder to avoid losinga dollar than to gain one. Similarly, though there are plenty ofpeople strong enough to resist doing something just because that'swhat one is supposed to do where they happen to be, there are fewstrong enough to keep working on something no one around them caresabout.

Because ambitions are to some extent incompatible and admirationis a zero-sum game, each city tends to focus on one type of ambition.The reason Cambridge is the intellectual capital is not just thatthere's a concentration of smart people there, but that there'snothing else people there care about more. Professors inNew York and the Bay area are second class citizens—till theystart hedge funds or startups respectively.

This suggests an answer to a question people in New York havewondered about since the Bubble: whether New York could grow intoa startup hub to rival Silicon Valley. One reason that's unlikelyis that someone starting a startup in New York would feel like asecond class citizen. [3]There's already something else people in New York admire more.

In the long term, that could be a bad thing for New York. The powerof an important new technology does eventually convert to money.So by caring more about money and less about power than SiliconValley, New York is recognizing the same thing, but slower.[4]And in fact it has been losing to Silicon Valley at its own game:the ratio of New York to California residents in the Forbes 400 hasdecreased from 1.45 (81:56) when the list was first published in1982 to .83 (73:88) in 2007.

_____


Not all cities send a message. Only those that are centers forsome type of ambition do. And it can be hard to tell exactly whatmessage a city sends without living there. I understand the messagesof New York, Cambridge, and Silicon Valley because I've lived forseveral years in each of them. DC and LA seem to send messagestoo, but I haven't spent long enough in either to say for sure whatthey are.

The big thing in LA seems to be fame. There's an A List of peoplewho are most in demand right now, and what's most admired is to beon it, or friends with those who are. Beneath that the message ismuch like New York's, though perhaps with more emphasis on physicalattractiveness.

In DC the message seems to be that the most important thing is whoyou know. You want to be an insider. In practice this seems towork much as in LA. There's an A List and you want to be on it orclose to those who are. The only difference is how the A List isselected. And even that is not that different.

At the moment, San Francisco's message seems to be the same asBerkeley's: you should live better. But this will change if enoughstartups choose SF over the Valley. During the Bubble that was apredictor of failure—a self-indulgent choice, like buyingexpensive office furniture. Even now I'm suspicious when startupschoose SF. But if enough good ones do, it stops being a self-indulgentchoice, because the center of gravity of Silicon Valley will shiftthere.

I haven't found anything like Cambridge for intellectual ambition.Oxford and Cambridge (England) feel like Ithaca or Hanover: themessage is there, but not as strong.

Paris was once a great intellectual center. If you went there in1300, it might have sent the message Cambridge does now. But Itried living there for a bit last year, and the ambitions of theinhabitants are not intellectual ones. The message Paris sends nowis: do things with style. I liked that, actually. Paris is theonly city I've lived in where people genuinely cared about art. InAmerica only a few rich people buy original art, and even the moresophisticated ones rarely get past judging it by the brand name ofthe artist. But looking through windows at dusk in Paris you cansee that people there actually care what paintings look like.Visually, Paris has the best eavesdropping I know. [5] 

There's one more message I've heard from cities: in London you canstill (barely) hear the message that one should be more aristocratic.If you listen for it you can also hear it in Paris, New York, andBoston. But this message is everywhere very faint. It would havebeen strong 100 years ago, but now I probably wouldn't have pickedit up at all if I hadn't deliberately tuned in to that wavelengthto see if there was any signal left.

_____


So far the complete list of messages I've picked up from cities is:wealth, style, hipness, physical attractiveness, fame, politicalpower, economic power, intelligence, social
...
注册或登录后查看完整内容
源地址：http://blog.renren.com/GetEntry.do?id=456228233&owner=222896569
来源：滕之飞的日志 | 分享 1 | 浏览 9
评论 | 分享 | 赞 | 举报
分享这篇日志的人也喜欢查看更多»

《适合练习日语的日剧和电影》
我记忆中的basketball
世界杯前嗮下DQ曾经在足球界的传奇（绝对真实 有图有真相）
申花曾经有个外援叫布兰科，他不是法国的也不是墨西哥的，他是0...
转载上海申花 内幕
吉梅内斯“未卜先知”，助萨拉戈萨保级成功再续三年
【甘肃】2011【TGA赛事基地】兰州基地第一届TGA全能赛...
仇东升-一个坚强的男人
TGA——网游竞技的新时代
腾讯TGA大赛开战
 
唐阳阳 : good
2010-04-03 12:44

猜你喜欢
热门分享
苏东坡与佛印的故事
十四分之一的故事
历史扇了你一巴掌
谁惹我 我就打韩国
男生易误解女生的五个行为!!!你一定...
教你几招哄老婆的方法
私人档案❤与狗狗有关的电影介绍
校园摩天轮毕业专题附文案（毕业礼物...
2010年中医药大学排名
怎么讨好女朋友——男生必看
显示更多»
对知识的敬畏
学姐的美，是不可言说的伤
我与董小姐
【维斯特洛大陆往事专题】冰与火之歌的传说与历史视频-官方出品...
由一条状态引发的一点思考
NJ？
我一直在等你一起吃饭
LOL版2013江苏高考作文——给你的爱，只剩最后一个R
硬派球迷
《富春山居图》完全观影指南
显示更多»

分享热搜榜

日志
视频
相册
1 生孩子是要顺产还是剖腹产（别指望男人为自己保存，动动手...

15796538
2 今天刚知道原来参考文献可以自动生成……真丢脸！分享给为...

3 世界排名前一百的英文歌，终于找全叻

4 word骨灰级水平，赶紧留一份

5 给你的Mp4大换血，精选Touch里3年收集的900多首歌，"经典不...

6 如何复制百度文库中的文章。。。这个必须留一份。。。

7 适合小假期的旅游景点（住宿+攻略+饮食）

更多热搜日志»
1 【喵呜字幕】有一种感情，能让旁观者为之动容，那就是爱！Wha...


68928211

2 牛人超节约室内空间创意设计,广大蜗居人士必看

3 广美学生何伟锋毕业作品-《小胖妞》

4 Caci 向 Liudmila 的表白（中文字幕）

5 11度青春之《老男孩》

6 [拍客]6岁娃乞讨养父 不知六一是个啥

7 中国人制作的"中国阅兵”视频 第一版

更多热搜视频»
1 简笔画大全~{当一个小孩子喜欢的老师吧~}不再打包发送


8599169
2 这是一尊转运佛，见此佛99秒内转发，可踢走霉运，好运相伴！

3 证件照...（图到用时方恨少，留着吧，会有用的

4 水果的不同切法，很适合孩子或招待客人用,存起来，要用随时能看

5 小文艺情侣头像。与你的小爱人一起用吧～更新版。

6 【80后】夫妻甜蜜2居小婚房 留着自己看的

7 漂亮的ppt背景全是1024以上

更多热搜相册»

热门日志推荐

美媒体称X-37空天飞机可破坏中国太空侦察设备
英语专八的考试内容流程及经验交流(受刺激了,听力原来是这...
北京故宫灵异事件 在当地确实有耳闻的~~慎入
noteexpress文献管理器的使用
加手仪式
新视野英语第四册的答案
第四次忍界大战战报（不断更新）
我要减肥 立志45公斤(先收集起来,以后慢慢实践)
中国农业大学2011年《国家学生体质健康标准》 测试补测（周...
好看的完本小说推荐-近年来50本经典网络小说(有详细点评排行)
查看更多»
热词推荐查看更多»

1 魅族 mx2 39924

2 马德莱娜 22673

3 亚洲大学排名 12261

4林靖恩 3306

5你不知道的端午节 635

6欧洲洪水 204

7神舟天宫交会对接 203

8纳达尔女友 197

9天下无双林志颖 130

10爷孙恋 124

分享这篇日志的人常去


黑龙江...


妖精的...


北京


灌篮高...


摄影


上海


名侦探...


五月天

关于
开放平台
人人游戏
公共主页
手机人人
团购
皆喜网
营销服务
招聘
友情链接
客服帮助
隐私
人人网©2013
北京千橡网景科技发展有限公司： 文网文[2009]169号·京ICP证090254号·京公网安备110000000009号·甲测资字11002066·文化部监督电子邮箱：wlwh@vip.sina.com·互联网药品信息服务资格证
文明办网文明上网举报电话：4000803580 举报邮箱：admin1@renren-inc.com    不良信息举报中心    网络110报警服务    北京文化市场举报热线
